Antecedents of Software-as-a-Service Adoption for Small
   and Medium Enterprise in Developing Countries

           Ahmed Mamdouh Abdelfatah Ibrahim1 and Norris Syed Abdullah2
   1 Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 Skudai, Johor, Malaysia.

                              Mamdouh@graduate.utm.my
2 Azman Hashim International Business School, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 Skudai,

                                       Johor, Malaysia.
                                      Norris@utm.my



       Abstract. Cloud computing Software as a Service (SaaS) has become one of
       the most hotly debated topics among enterprise information technology
       professionals (IT). Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) with limited budgets
       and human resources are among the most frequent users of cloud computing to
       take advantage of this technology. Due to their limited financial resources, it is
       crucial for enterprises to adopt innovative technologies that do not require
       initial investment and can be deployed as and when required. The rapid
       improvements and innovations in SaaS in recent years have led to many
       companies in various industries accepting this technology as viable. The shift to
       SaaS comes with a number of challenges that go beyond the technology. The
       adoption of cloud computing in SMEs is influenced by a number of factors.
       Before deciding to use cloud-based solutions, these conditions need to be
       thoroughly assessed.

       The objective of this research is to investigate into the significant factors which
       influence Cloud computing Software as a Service (SaaS) adoption by Small and
       medium enterprises in the developing nations. Previous research has
       demonstrated that SaaS adoption benefits SMEs greatly. Therefore, the goal of
       this study to presents and develop a research model including Relative
       Advantage, Complexity, Security & Privacy, Compatibility, Top Management
       Support, SaaS Awareness, Organization Culture, Competitive Pressure,
       Regulatory Support, Personal Innovativeness and Prior Technology Experience
       factors based on the integration of the Technology Organisation Environment
       (TOE) and Human Organisation Technology Fit (HOT-fit) models. The study
       pertains to SMEs that have previously adopt cloud computing SaaS. The data
       can be obtained using a quantitative technique via surveys of SMEs in Qatar as
       a developing country and analyzed using the Smart PLS tool.


       Keywords: Cloud Computing; SaaS; Adoption; SME’s; TOE; HOT-fit;
       Developing Countries.
    1. Introduction
The development of telecommunications and technology has long been considered
one of the most important growth drivers in various industries [1]. This makes it
necessary for companies to adopt and use new technologies to improve quality and
increase benefits in all industries [3]. Cloud computing has made significant progress
in the last decade, with usage reaching up to 94 per cent (Shang & Kauffman, 2020).
As a result, cloud computing has become one of the most advanced solutions IT for
public and private companies around the world. According to a recent study, the
market for cloud computing will grow by more than 17% in 2019, reaching $200
billion in 2019 and $278 billion in 2022 [11].

The below is a summary of the paper's framework: The first Section gives an
overview of SaaS cloud computing, including the research question and objectives as
well. The second section digs into the literature review which include CC service
delivery models, research methodology and SaaS adoption challenges. Section three
contains the proposed framework and the hypothesis. While the last Section including
the main conclusions and the future work.


   Problem Background
Low performance and lack of economic diversity are the result of the absence of a
technological environment for entrepreneurship that necessitates the use of cloud
computing SaaS in small and medium enterprises (SMEs). This is to enable
enterprises with limited budget [12] and human resources to benefit from SaaS cloud
computing and reduce the cost of IT infrastructure and expertise [13][14] to improve
their economic viability.

Despite the benefits of SaaS, there are a number of barriers to adoption. Different
authors have pointed out different difficulties in adopting SaaS in different situations.
According to the findings of [17], these are customization, security and privacy [18],
virtualization and multi-tenancy [28]. Lack of familiarity with the definition of cloud
computing services & insufficient knowledge, [22] loss of control, regional
regulations [10], governance [23], lack of a well-managed and established standard,
management resistance [24].

Despite the many benefits cloud computing can offer, companies are reluctant to
adopt it [29]. In a modern environment, the pace of technological innovation and new
thinking is a hot topic. Although several studies have been conducted to investigate
the barriers to adoption of CC, they are insufficient [30], and the question remains:
How can a technology like cloud computing (CC) help SMEs overcome the previous
problems?

In the context of developing countries, Qatar offers an excellent economic climate
[31], but the majority of SMEs in Qatar still struggle with the use of cloud computing
SaaS and the adoption of cloud computing is still in its infancy with only 3%.
   Research Questions
This research will address the antecedents that influence intention to adopt cloud
computing SaaS for small and medium-sized enterprise in Qatar. The aim of this
research is to find answers to the questions listed below.
"How can a model be developed to enable the adoption of SaaS in SMEs?”. The
following sub-questions support the primary research question:

        RQ1: What is the status of SAAS adoption in SMEs in Qatar?
        RQ2: What factors influence the adoption of SAAS in SMEs in Qatar?
        RQ3: How can the model for SAAS adoption be developed for SMEs in
         Qatar?

  Research Objectives.
The research objectives can be formulated as follows:
     RO1: To explore the current status of SAAS adoption in SMEs in Qatar.
     RO2: To identify the factors influencing the adoption of SAAS among SMEs
        in Qatar.
     RO3: Develop a model for the adoption of SaaS for SMEs in Qatar.

This research will address the antecedents that influence the intention to adopt cloud
computing Software as a service for SMEs in Qatar.




    2. Literature Review
   Cloud Computing Service Delivery Models
Cloud computing is a model for ubiquitous, convenient and on-demand network
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g. networks, servers,
storage, applications and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal management effort or interaction with the service provider [4].

Previous research has found that there are three main models for cloud service
delivery, referred to as SPI MODEL. SPI is an acronym that stands for Software,
Platform and Infrastructure [5]. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), where a provider
offers its customers paid access to storage, networks, servers and other computing
resources in the cloud [6].

Platform as a Service (PaaS), where the provider enables access to an infrastructure so
that the user can build their own application. The platform allows customers to build
their applications that run on the service provider's infrastructure [7]. Software-as-a-
Service (SaaS): In this model, the customer can access the provider's infrastructure via
an interface. The most commonly used interfaces are web browsers. In this model, a
single instance on the service provider's side supports multiple access instances on the
client's side [8].
   Research Methodology
Howell defines research methodology as the general research strategy that outlines the
way in which research is to be conducted and specifies, among other things, the
methods to be used in the process [2].
In order to answer the research question, survey research needs to collect data from
various sources. For this research, the existing literature was also consulted and
reviewed. Therefore, the research design used can be called survey research.

  Software as a service Cloud Computing Adoption challenges

Both developing and developed countries have adopted SaaS. However, developed
countries are far ahead of emerging countries in terms of adoption and use of the
technology. Despite the many benefits of cloud computing, its value has yet to be
recognized in developing countries. Many different studies [32], [33] have
contributed significantly to the adoption of cloud computing in developed countries.
For example, [32] studied CCA at CC adopter organizations in the UK using the TOE
model. The study's findings revealed that while risks are frequently connected with
SEMs' adoption of innovative technologies, organizational innovativeness and
associated capacities play a critical influence in cloud computing adoption.

 In Universities in Malaysia, a study was done to determine the differences based on
SaaS adoption [34]. The research emphasized the importance of innovation for SaaS
adoption, as well as effort expectation, social impact, performance expectancy, self-
efficacy, peer, and even superior components. As stated by Awodele et al, issues in
cloud computing services can be in terms of (a) Network and Data Security, (b)
Governance, Compliance and legal, and (c) Communication interface and
Virtualization Security [19]. Haider and Selvan, have addressed the inability to
maintain data confidentiality because of the huge number of access devices and
applications to store and manage data in cloud-based storage to be the most prominent
issue in cloud computing [20].

Security and privacy challenges associated with SaaS be addressed as follows [15].
Following findings from (Nema, S. 2016), security and privacy issues in cloud
computing are in terms of Loss of control, Lack of transparency, Virtualization, and
Multi-Tenancy as shown in figure [9]. Kumar et al, narrated that Loss of control in
cloud computing can be in terms of data loss and breach, data storage, and sharing
under several Multiple Regional Regulations [16]. Research on the use of cloud
computing infers nearly 63% of customers disagree to use services of cloud services
providers in case the vendor fails to prevent loss of data through unauthorized
accesses.

   Factors Influencing Adoption of SaaS Cloud Computing
While SaaS is a strategic decision made by businesses to cut costs, reduce risk, and
increase system flexibility, Challenges to the adoption of SaaS, in general, can be
categorized as stated by Branco et al. [21], can be in terms of Advantages of Cloud
Computing Maturity of Business, Trust in Cloud Service provider, Analysis of Risks
and Agreements of service level.
The shortage of qualified folks and leadership abilities, high labor, and space
expenses [35] which are regarded as malfunction factors in the organization, as well
as a dearth of a society of entrepreneurialism which is strongly based on good strategy
implementation, are the most specific issues facing the small and medium-sized
enterprises segment in Qatar [36]. To lower the risk, the business owner must also
identify and examine the current scenario as well as the problematic area.

As discussed by [37] there are various factors that affect the decision of adopting
SaaS services [25]. While some companies can be seen having technological concerns
in terms of the security of data, some find adoption of cloud services complex. This is
because of the fact that; cyber-attacks nowadays have been on a significant rise these
days. Hackers are deliberately trying to find out alternatives to breach securities and
many times they are being successful in it.

In addition, being a comparatively advanced and ever-evolving technology, most of
the users are significantly ignorant of appropriate management and security features
associated with cloud computing and hence find the management quite more complex
than onsite information storage, maintenance and safekeeping. On the other hand, it is
impossible for anyone to access data at his own convenience. Rather, any
unauthorized user is supposed to get into the storage premises and acquire
information from individuals having knowledge of security features in order to breach
the security. Moreover, sharing cloud services by a number of users reduces the
control of organizations over IT/IS.

While small and medium enterprises find it quite comfortable to enjoy services of a
common shared pool, larger organizations do not find it convenient. This is because
of the fact that a shared information pool allows users to use information stored by
other users and hence costs of information collection, maintenance and security
reduces significantly which in turn helps in cost reduction of SMEs.

Quality of service and security provisions affect the decision of using cloud services
by government organizations [26]. This is because; some of the government
organizations such as national financial institutions and data related to the defense
sector are highly confidential and hence cannot be taken a chance of getting any kind
of unauthorized access. The use of any kind of cloud services by financial and defense
organizations is supposed to make them susceptible to getting attacked by cyber
attackers and get the entire country to go through a financial crisis and breach in
national security.

Factors identified by Tehrani and Shirazi, [27] influence the Adoption decision. These
factors are; External Support, Pressure of competition in the market, Knowledge of
decision-makers and employees on efficiencies of Cloud Computing, Information
intensity, potential advantages, privacy and security, innovativeness, complexity,
trialability, and compatibility with business requirements, used technologies, and
company norms.
To summarize, the majority of past research focused on businesses as a whole, with
only a few studies focusing specifically on small and medium-sized businesses.
Previous research has primarily focused on the adoption of CC, with only a few
studies focusing specifically on SaaS. While these studies may not be able to exactly
pinpoint the benefits that small and medium-sized businesses can achieve by adopting
SaaS, very few studies are able to address the reasons why their issues with cloud
computing SaaS persist. Only a small amount of research has been done in Qatar to
investigate the antecedents of SMEs adopting SaaS, and only 3% of Qatari SMEs
have done so. Very minimal studies are also looking at human level adoption for
small and medium-sized businesses in developing or industrialized countries. As a
conclusion, more research is needed to determine the various antecedents that may
influence SaaS adoption among SMEs in developing nations.



    3. Proposed Frame work and Hypothesis
This study aims to study the current antecedents which may obstruct SAAS cloud
computing Adoption through implementing combined model consisting of TOE
model integrated with the Hot-Fit model.

The current proposed model as shown in Figure 1, incorporates TOE (Technology-
Organization-Environment) as among the most applicable frameworks for technology
innovation at the organizational level while acquiring DOI (Relative Advantage,
Complexity) technological constructs [38]. A few current proposed constructs
(Organizational Culture, Awareness of SaaS) are got to add to the organizational level
by customizing TOE to define the significant factors that affect Cloud Computing
SaaS adoption in SMEs. Which means , the Technology construct incorporates three
DOI factors (Relative Advantage, Compatibility, and Complexity) with Security,
Organization constructs (Company Size, Awareness, Organizational Culture), and
Environment constructs (Competitive Pressure, and Government Policy) into the
original TOE model. Furthermore, with the addition of HOT-Fit, factors such as
innovativeness and technical competence are considered.
Fig. 1. The Proposed Model (VAM & ECM).

       H1: Relative Advantage would significantly influence SME’s to adopt SaaS.
       H2: Complexity of SaaS would significantly influence SME’s SaaS
        adoption.
       H3: Security & Privacy of SaaS would significantly influence SME’s to
        adopt
       H4: Compatibility of SaaS would significantly influence SME’s SaaS
        adoption.
       H5: Top Management Support would significantly influence SME’s to adopt
        SaaS.
       H6: SaaS Awareness would significantly influence SME’s to adopt SaaS.
       H7: Organization Culture would significantly influence SMEs to adopt SaaS.
       H8: Competitive Pressure would significantly influence SME’s to adopt
        SaaS.
       H9: Regulatory Support would significantly influence SME’s to adopt SaaS.
       H10: Personal Innovativeness would significantly influence to adopt SaaS
       H11: Prior Technology Experience would significantly influence SMEs to
        adopt SaaS.
    4. Conclusion
Across all the services especially on request, SaaS cloud computing is a technology
where computation can be carried out at extremely low costs. To encourage more
companies to adopt SaaS cloud computing, the service providers need to address all
the challenges affecting the adoption for their clients. In this paper, we have addressed
and demonstrated the numerous obstacles and challenges related to SaaS cloud
computing challenges.

 Addressing these challenges requires research to be conducted as a future work from
different areas like informatics, statistics, risk modeling, social sciences, and
physiological factors. Also, a to investigate the relationship between Relative
Advantage, Complexity, Security & Privacy, Compatibility, Competitive pressure,
Regulatory Support, Awareness, Top Management support, Culture, Personal
innovation, Prior Tech experience, and SaaS adoption as well. As a future work, a
research need to conduct to test the developed model and the hypotheses by collecting
the data using a quantitative technique via surveys of SMEs in Qatar as a developing
country then analyzed the data using the Smart PLS tool to sort out the significant
factors that may influence SaaS adoption in the developing countries.


References

 1. Gangwar, H., Date, H., & Ramaswamy, R. (2015). Understanding determinants of cloud
    computing adoption using an integrated TAM-TOE model. Journal of Enterprise
    Information Management, 28(1), 107–130. doi:10.1108/JEIM-08-2013-0065
 2. Howell, K. E. (2013), Introduction to the Philosophy of Methodology. London: Sage
    Publications
 3. Arvanitis, S., Kyriakou, N., & Loukis, E. N. (2017). Why do firms adopt cloud
    computing? A comparative analysisbased on South and North Europe firm data.
    Telematics and Informatics, 34(7), 1322–1332. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2016.05.013
 4. Mell, P. M., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST definition of cloud computing.
    doi:10.6028/nist.sp.800-145
 5. K. Hashizume, D. Rosado, E. Fernández-Medina and E. Fernandez, "An analysis of
    security issues for cloud computing", J Internet Serv Appl, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 5, 2013.
 6. IaaS, PaaS and SaaS – IBM Cloud service models, visited 24 July 2019,
    https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/iaas-paas-saas
 7. Cloud computing service and deployment models: layers and management", Choice
    Reviews Online, vol. 50, no. 07, pp. 50-3896-50-3896, 2013.
 8. Q. Alajmi, Ali Safa Sadiq, Adzhar Kamaludin and Mohammed A. Al-Sharafi, Cloud
    Computing Delivery and Delivery Models: Opportunity and Challenges, June 2018, DOI:
    10.1166/asl.2018.11537
 9. Nema, S. 2016. A Survey of Security and Privacy Challenges in Cloud Computing.
    International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication
    Engineering, 5(3), pp. 191-194.
10. Kumar, D., Samalia, H. V., & Verma, P. (2017). Exploring suitability of cloud computing
    for small and medium-sized enterprises in India. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
    Development, 24(4), 814–832. doi:10.1108/jsbed-01-2017-0002
11. Gartner, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Computing, 2008, [Online] Available at:
    http://www.gartner.com/DisplayDocument?id=685308 La (Accessed: July 2020)
12. Mwaniki, P., & Ondiek, C. (2018). Evaluation of the Effects of SaaS on SMEs in Nairobi
    County, Kenya. Journal of Information Systems Engineering & Management, 3(3), 20.
13. Fakieh, B., Blount, Y., & Busch, P. (2016). SMEs and cloud computing: The benefits to
    the national economy and global competitiveness. Paper presented at the Conference: The
    13 th European Mediterranean & Middle Eastern Conference on Information Systems,
    EMCIS.
14. Trinh, T. P., Pham, C. H., & Tran, D. (2015). An Adoption Model of Software as a Service
    (SaaS) in SMEs. Paper presented at the PACIS.
15. Sherif Sakr & Albert Zomaya, 2019, Encyclopedia of Big Data Technologies , first edition
    Copyright Springer Nature Switzerland AG , eReference ISBN 978-3-319-77525-8
16. Kumar, D., Samalia, H. V., & Verma, P. (2017). Exploring suitability of cloud computing
    for small and medium-sized enterprises in India. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
    Development, 24(4), 814–832. doi:10.1108/jsbed-01-2017-0002
17. Aleem, S., Ahmed, F., Batool, R., & Khattak, A. (2019). Empirical investigation of key
    factors for SaaS architecture dimension. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing.
18. Sun, Y., Zhang, J., Xiong, Y. and Zhu, G., 2014. Data security and privacy in cloud
    computing. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 10(7), p.190903.
19. Awodele O., Ominike Akpovi A., Adebayo A. O. & Tayo O. O., 2017, Security and
    Privacy Issues in Cloud Computing, ISSN : 2394-4714
20. Haider, Y. and Selvan, S., 2016. Confidentiality Issues in Cloud Computing and
    countermeasures: A Survey.
21. Branco Jr, T., de Sá-Soares, F. and Rivero, A.L., 2017. Key Issues for the Successful
    Adoption of Cloud Computing. Procedia Computer Science, 121, pp.115-122.
22. Kumar, D., Samalia, H. V. and Verma, P. (2017) ‘Exploring suitability of cloud computing
    for small and medium-sized enterprises in India’, Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
    Development, 24(4), pp. 814–832. doi: 10.1108/JSBED-01-2017-0002.
23. Awodele, O., Adebayo, A.O. and Tayo, O.O., 2017. Security and Privacy Issues in Cloud
    Computing. Communications On Applied Electronics, 7(3), pp.14-17.
24. Ahmed, A. M., Moreton, R., Mehdi, Q. H., & Elmaghraby, A. (2013). E-government
    services challenges and opportunities for developing countries: The case of Libya. Paper
    presented at the 2013 Second International Conference on Informatics & Applications
    (ICIA).
25. Hsu, C.L. and Lin, J.C.C., 2016. Factors affecting the adoption of cloud services in
    enterprises. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 14(4), pp.791-822.
26. Alsanea, M., Barth, J. and Griffith, R., 2014. Factors affecting the adoption of cloud
    computing in the government sector: a case study of Saudi Arabia. International Journal of
    Cloud Computing and Service Science, 36.
27. Tehrani, S.R. and Shirazi, F., 2014, June. Factors influencing the adoption of cloud
    computing by small and medium size enterprises (SMEs). In International Conference on
    Human Interface and the Management of Information (pp. 631-642). Springer, Cham.
28. Nema, S. 2016. A Survey of Security and Privacy Challenges in Cloud Computing.
    International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication
    Engineering, 5(3), pp. 191-194.
29. Fishman, C 2012, 'The insourcing boom', The Atlantic, December, pp. 44-52.
30. Gide, E., & Sandu, R. 2015. “A Study to Explore the Key Factors Impacting on Cloud
    Based Service Adoption in Indian SMEs”. In 12th International Conference on e-Business
    Engineering, 387-392. IEEE.
31. arabianbusiness,    2013      ,Qatar   SMEs     face     barriers   to   2022     projects,
    https://www.arabianbusiness.com/qatar-smes-face-barriers-2022-projects-485087.html
32. El-Haddadeh, R. (2019) ‘Digital Innovation Dynamics Influence on Organisational
    Adoption: The Case of Cloud Computing Services’, Information Systems Frontiers.
    Information Systems Frontiers. doi: 10.1007/s10796-019-09912-2.
33. Senarathna, I., Wilkin, C., Warren, M., Yeoh, W., & Salzman, S. (2018). Factors that
    influence adoption of cloud computing: an empirical study of Australian SMEs.
    Australasian Journal of Information Systems, 22. doi: 10.3127/ajis.v22i0.1603.
34. Yadegaridehkordi, E., Nilashi, M., Shuib, L., & Samad, S. (2020). A behavioral intention
    model for SaaS-based collaboration services in higher education. Education and
    Information Technologies, 25(2), 791-816.
35. The Report: Qatar 2008 - Page 178 - Google Books Result ,
    https://books.google.com.qa/books?id=stSsFxDTl4QC&pg=PA178&lpg=PA178&dq=pro
    blem+of+high+cost+of+skilled+labour+%26+spaces+in+qatar&source=bl&ots=5y1PtZW
    yjy&sig=ACfU3U342dib1LmBUbGBh0Szt8oGi0AA1g&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwib
    h76v7ZroAhXo63MBHXJHCXMQ6AEwAHoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=problem%20of
    %20high%20cost%20of%20skilled%20labour%20%26%20spaces%20in%20qatar&f=fals
    e
36. Singh, A., Sharma, S., Kumar, S. R., & Yadav, S. A. (2016). Overview of PaaS and SaaS
    and its application in cloud computing. Paper presented at the 2016 International
    Conference on Innovation and Challenges in Cyber Security (ICICCS-INBUSH).
37. Hsu, C.-L., & Lin, J. C.-C. (2016). Exploring Factors Affecting the Adoption of Internet of
    Things Services. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 58(1), 49–57.
    doi:10.1080/08874417.2016.1186524
38. Rogers, E.M. (2003), Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed., Free Press, New York, NY.
