Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03502-w

S.I.: INFORMATION- TRANSPARENT SUPPLY CHAINS



Mediating role of cloud of things in improving performance
of small and medium enterprises in the Indian context

Vaibhav S. Narwane1 · Rakesh D. Raut2 · Sachin Kumar Mangla3              ·
Bhaskar B. Gardas4 · Balkrishna E. Narkhede5 · Anjali Awasthi6 ·
Pragati Priyadarshinee7


© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020


Abstract
Integration of cloud computing and the Internet of things can influence large as well as small-
scale organizations in transforming their business systems for high performance. However, in
developing nations like India, cloud of things is relatively novel, and there is a need for its
proper understanding specifically, in small and medium scaled enterprises. This study aims
to investigate the mediating role of cloud of things on the performance of small and medium
scaled enterprises and the influence of various key factors namely security and privacy, per-
ceived ease of use, top management support, perceived security risk, big data analytics, trust,
customer–supplier intention, manufacturing infrastructure, IT support, knowledge sharing, and
external environment support on cloud of things was analyzed. A sample of 290 responses
from 96 Indian small and medium scaled enterprises was collected and exploratory fac-
tor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, structural equation modelling methodologies were
employed for the analysis. Results suggest that big data analytics, top management support,
trust, perceived security risk, etc. require the mediating support of cloud of things. This study
is useful for managers, policymakers, practitioners, and regulatory authorities to understand
the importance of information, and the cloud of things, and further to formulate strategies to
improve firm’s performance by improving the information transparency across the value chain.

Keywords Cloud computing · Information transparency · Supply chain management ·
Smart manufacturing · Small and medium enterprises


1 Introduction

Currently, with Industry 4.0 becoming a key pillar, most of the companies are concerned
about lagging in its adoption. Cloud computing (CC) and the internet of things (IoT) are
an integral part of Industry 4.0 and Smart Factories (Kang et al. 2016). Characteristics of
CC and IoT are complimentary regarding reachability, storage, computational capabilities
and big data (Ahmadov and Helo 2018; Botta et al. 2016). In recent years, most of the


* Sachin Kumar Mangla
  sachin.kumar@plymouth.ac.uk; sachinmangl@gmail.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article


                                                                                      13
                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                                   Annals of Operations Research


firms looked Industry 4.0 and smart manufacturing (SM) with interest but with a sense of
destruction. As per Kang et al. (2016), Industry 4.0 or SM is the fourth industrial revolu-
tion. It is a new paradigm shift and convergence of cutting-edge ICT and manufacturing
technologies across supply chains. The information provides a platform for making useful
and optimized decisions through swifter and more accurate decision-making processes in
transparent supply chain system. The paradigm shift from the information level to signifi-
cant data level is a need for SM and technologies like CoT, and artificial intelligence (AI)
are assisting businesses through data management.
   Integration of cloud computing (CC) and the internet of things (IoT) are termed as
Cloud of Things (CoT) and coined by Deutsche Telecom, Germany in 2016. CoT is assist-
ing new manufacturing paradigms (like SM, cyber-physical system, knowledge-driven
manufacturing, cloud manufacturing, responsive manufacturing, and social manufacturing)
through data collection, data analytics, and decision-making techniques (Esmaeilian et al.
2016). Critical characteristics of SM such as digitization, distributed intelligence, collab-
orative supply chain management (SCM), integrated decision making, advanced sensors,
and big data analytics (BDA) proposes SM as a promised solution for future (Liu and Yi
2018; Lu 2017). These technologies helps in improving the transparency of supply chain to
enable managers what is happening in both the upstream and downstream of chain as well
as ensure a smooth flow of information in both the way.
   In the future, the amount of data on the devices is going to be enormous and to store
this data using physical devices would be difficult. In this sense, there would be a need for
rental storage space, and so clouds may be an effective choice (Botta et al. 2016; Manuel
2015). Manufacturing goals of CoT are related to throughput, scalability, latency, energy,
security, and safety (Da Xu et al. 2014). Application of CoT in manufacturing will help
organizations in smart equipment maintenance, process monitoring, quality control, design
and planning (Tao et al. 2018). Thus, it is necessary to study the adoption of SM and CoT
together for organization. Earlier studies of adoption either deal with CC (Gangwar et al.
2015) or IoT (Da Xu et al. 2014) disjointedly. Recently, Narwane et al. (In press) consid-
ered the intention of CoT adoption, but the paper did not discuss SM. de Sousa Jabbour
et al. (2018a) deliberated about SM and sustainable manufacturing; however, they doesn’t
discussed the drivers/critical success factors of CoT in industry. Many research articles
available on BDA, and firm performance (Wamba et al. 2017), BDA and sustainable world-
class manufacturing (Dubey et al. 2017) fail to address the impact of CoT on SMEs firms
performance. Manufacturing SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) can be benefited
through CoT, with BDA assisting the same. 5 V’s (variety, velocity, volume, veracity, and
value-adding) of big data can improve CoT adoption and consequently firm performance.
   Big data identifies patterns and learning source for the cloud-based system. BDA analy-
ses further sensor data collected by IoT for the diffusion of knowledge. CoT based sys-
tems can be utilized for smart factory policy creation as well as knowledge creation. Smart
manufacturing setup can further melodramatically change the SMEs performance. Based
on these arguments, this study targets the Indian manufacturing SMEs. Indian SME devel-
opment Act of 2006 mentioned a huge investment (in Indian Rupees) for advancements in
equipments in manufacturing enterprises (Ghatak 2010).
   It may be noted that the CoT adoption in the Indian context is at a very nascent stage
and big organizations on the pathway for adopting CoT technologies (IANS 2019).
   The objectives of this paper are as follows:

   (i) To identify the issues for implementation of the CoT in manufacturing SMEs,
  (ii) To assess the mediating role of CoT adoption on the firm’s performance.

13
Annals of Operations Research


 (iii) To suggest managerial implications of CoT adoption.

   To address the above-said objectives, the literature survey was carried out to identify
factors and sub-factors followed by hypothesis and analysis using empirical analysis to
establish a relationship.
   The remainder of this paper has the following structure: Sect. 2 provides a literature sur-
vey on CoT, and Sect. 3 presents a conceptual model and the hypotheses. Section 4 outlines
the research methodology, and Sect. 5 shows the empirical results. Section 6 presents the
managerial implications of the study—finally, conclusion and future scope of the study is
presented in Sect. 7.



2 Literature survey

The literature review can be broadly categorized into three sections such as (1) CoT and
supporting technologies (2) CoT applications in a manufacturing firm, and (3) identifica-
tion of research gap.


2.1 CoT and supporting technologies

IoT is a network of things like software, sensors, physical objects etc. (Kang et al. 2016).
Kevin Ashton coined it in 1999 in the UK. Some of the critical IoT technologies which are
widely used today includes RFID (Radio-frequency identification), WSN (Wireless Sen-
sors Network), CC, Middleware, etc. The Primary function of IoT is to collect or exchange
the data acquired from the sensors or software (Kang et al. 2016). IoT has smart nodes to
interact autonomously for all kinds of services; however, openness and wide distribution
makes IoT objects vulnerable to cyber-attacks (Conti et al. 2018). Technologies of Industry
4.0 such as CPS (Cyber-Physical System), IoT, Cloud Manufacturing (CM), and Additive
Manufacturing (AM) can assist environmentally-sustainable manufacturing, in terms of
design for environment, cleaner production, and green supply chain initiatives (de Sousa
Jabbour et al. 2018a, b). SM, also known as predictive manufacturing, assists an improve-
ment in manufacturing systems through big data and information management (Dubey
et al. 2017). Disruptive technologies such as CC, big data have been leveraged by IoT,
and in recent time IoT integration with blockchain can furtehr achieve security, reliability,
scalability, autonomy, market to service, and decentralization (Reyna et al. 2018). On the
top of all, supply chain transparency is the issue, among the manufactures and their supply
members.
   BDA is also used to improve efficient decision making, supply chain performance, and
sustainable manufacturing. BDA for WCSM (world-class sustainable manufacturing) can
offer better environmental performance, social performance and economic performance
(Dubey et al. 2017). BDA helps organizations in demand planning, supply chain network,
and collaboration with partnering companies (Wamba et al. 2017). Market turbulence
always plays a negative role in company performance; however, BDA can predict market
turbulence as well (Gunasekaran et al. 2017). BDA capability can improve both system
quality and information quality. Big data further improves firm performance through con-
tinuous improvement in business value (Ren et al. 2017). Common challenges in BDA are
heterogeneity, scalability, accuracy, complexity, security issues (privacy, integrity, threats

                                                                                  13
                                                                    Annals of Operations Research


to data availability, mitigation of DoS attacks, confidentiality), Retrieve/Reuse/Discover
(Jin et al. 2015).


2.2 CoT applications in manufacturing context

CC is the term used for on-demand distribution of the software applications and other IT
resources over the internet and cost based on the consumption. Eric Schmidt coined the
term ‘CC’ in 2006. It has many benefits, such as adaptability, multi-tenancy, reliability,
scalability, etc. (Zissis and Lekkas 2012). However, CC services need specific security
requirements for the physical level, virtual level, and application level. The physical level
has issues of network attacks, hardware interruption, connection flooding, etc.; while vir-
tual level issues include communication disruptions, defacement, session hijacking, soft-
ware deletion, etc.; application-level issues consist of interception, data modification, net-
work exposure, privacy breach, etc. According to Varghese and Buyya (2018), emerging
computing architecture such as volunteer computing, fog computing, mobile computing,
edge computing, serverless computing, and software-defined computing would have an
impact on CC based applications.
   CC and IoT are the most critical enabling technologies in Industry 4.0. In IoT-enabled
manufacturing, manufacturing resources such as machines, workers, tools are intercon-
nected, and share/exchange real-time data through internet RFID tags and readers are used
for the data collection purpose on shop floors, assembly lines and warehouses.
   CoT, which is the resultant of merging of cloud computing (CC) and the internet of
things (IoT) has used in manufacturing. For example, with the support of IoT technology,
various smart sensors, both the physical manufacturing resource, and the software manu-
facturing resource can be intelligently perceived and connected to other networks through
various information mechanisms (Han et al. 2018; Tao et al. 2014); integrating CC with IoT
solves problems of each technology partially (Perera et al. 2014); CoT gives enhanced ser-
vice provisioning and makes efficient utilization of resources (Botta et al. 2016). According
to Deutsche Telecom, CoT is a platform which collects and evaluates the sensor data from
different machines. In CoT network, IoT devices rely on CC for storage, data transfer and
data analysis (Mai and Khalil 2017)
   However, research issues and challenges for CoT needs to be addressed for broad adop-
tion in manufacturing sectors. Security and privacy are significant challenges in the deploy-
ment of CoT. Thus legal and social aspects are a primary concern for top management
(Díaz et al. 2016; Botta et al. 2016). Authentication in CoT integrates different devices
deployed for assessing information in diverse context.
   With a massive number of connected sensors communicating through WSN (wire-
less sensor network), energy consumption is a big concern (Da Xu et al. 2014). Data
processing such as data acquisition, transmission, storage, processing, and usage con-
sumes much electric power. Thus sustainable practices need to be adopted in the design,
production, and service for CoT manufacturing (Tao et al. 2016). With some technolo-
gies and devices in CoT, data heterogeneity and interoperability is also a critical issue
(Díaz et al. 2016). Thus, standards and protocols are needed for the national and inter-
national level. According to Wang et al. (2016), CoT application can assist in the design,
manufacturing, assembly, logistic, marketing, and supplier aspects of a value chain. It
means that CoT can help enterprises in a holistic sense to achieve goals. CoT along with
BDA capabilities used by retailers of USA and UK, some of the examples are Amazon
for recommendations for consumers, Wal-Mart for optimizing supply-chain, and Tesco

13
Annals of Operations Research


for product promotions (Manyika et al. 2011). The aerospace industry, USA combined
manufacturing and repair datasets, followed by predictive analysis to predict the future
for product escape and number of returns (McAfee et al. 2012). CoT helped General
Electric, the USA to optimize service contracts which boosted their industrial product
sale and reduced after-sale maintenance cost (Davenport et al. 2012).
   Organizations in developing countries such as India have also started implementing
CC and IoT for their business. Tata motor, India is using these advanced techniques for
customer relationship management (CRM) for process excellence as well as six sigma
principle (Srivastava et al. 2013). In doing so, Tata motors achieved an increase in cus-
tomer satisfaction as well as a reduction in cost and driving quality in the manufactur-
ing process. Developing countries like India are collaborating with developed countries
like France for adopting SM technology. To improve the productivity of stakeholders
and collaborative work, India and France have developed the IoT application framework
(Patel and Cassou 2015). However, the adoption rate of CoT, as well as SM for develop-
ing countries is far less than in developed countries. According to Junaid Ahmad (World
Bank Country Director in India), Indian sectors must adopt sustainable practices (e.g.
information, data, etc.) to meet the needs of globalization and better information trans-
paency across business functions.



2.3 Research gaps

From literature survey, the adoption issues of CoT in developing countries differ from
developed countries. The current literature discusses the adoption of CC and IoT dis-
jointedly; few articles deliberate about the adoption of a CoT. In adoption studies on
CC and IoT, various authors recognized critical factors and its influence on the busi-
ness performance of the organization. Enterprises must be aware of the advantages of
combining CC and IoT which is capable of superseding the limitations of individual
technology. The benefits of CoT for SMEs of developing countries not much debated in
the literature. Hence, the present paper attempts to identify critical factors of CoT for
improving the performance of manufacturing SMEs in India.
   Business firms can improve their decision making through data analytics (Wamba et al.
2017). SM, also known as predictive manufacturing, is an improvement in manufactur-
ing systems through BDA. Although many literature papers indicate a positive correlation
between BDA and firm performance, yet little is known about how BDA can assist CoT
adoption for an improved business performance. Data analytics capability not only assists
the cloud system but also considers as a prime requirement for IoT applications. In this
sense, in this paper, the authors considered BDA as an enabler for CoT adoption.
   Also, few studies considered the effect of Industry 4.0 and sustainable manufacturing;
de Sousa Jabbour et al. (2018a) discussed about these two concepts; however, they doesn’t
not take into account the CoT aspect. As a result, there is a need for discussing the effect of
CoT adoption on a firm performance from BDA and information transparency perspective
for a developing country like India. Hence, the present study considers CoT as a mediator
between firm performance and BDA with other elements like manufacturing levers, pri-
vacy, IT resources, top management support, etc. However, the proposed methodology has
some limitations which are discussed later. It must be noted that understanding the effect of
BDA on CoT adoption will assist managers with an effective and faster implementation of
the smart factory and information transparent supply chain.


                                                                                   13
                                                                       Annals of Operations Research


3 Conceptual framework and proposed hypothesis

Based on the above literature, the conceptual framework is shown in Fig. 1. Proposed
hypothesis and the sub-criteria (items) are discussed in Table 1.


4 Research methodology

4.1 Sample characteristic

To test the hypothesis, a 7 point Likert scale was used in the questionnaire survey, which
offers better variability and improves the accuracy in capturing the survey responses as
compared to 5 points Likert scale. The survey was directed to IT managers and engi-
neers in Indian manufacturing organizations those are involved in CC and IoT initiatives
to enhance their overall performance. SMEs working in an automobile, textile and cloth-
ing, electronics, and metals and machinery are selected as sample in this work. Total of
120 SMEs in India were shortlisted for the survey. The pilot study was carried out with
123 responses which were collected through e-mail and personal visits. Later, the question-
naire was upgraded and refined. Ninety-six organizations responded to the survey and out
of total 330 responses received, 290 responses were found valid. Table 2 shows the sam-
ple characteristics, organizations having employee size 200–250 have responded highest
156 (53.79%). Out of four types of industry, 150 (51.72%) responses were received from


            Security and Privacy (SAP)


         Perceived IT Security Risk (PTR)
                                                         H1 (-)

          Perceived Ease of Use (PEU)             H2 (-)

                                                   H3 (+)
        Top Management Support (TMS)

                                                  H4 (+)


         Trust and Social Practices (TSP)        H5 (+)
                                                                             H12 (+)
                                                                                       SMEs Factory
                                                                    CoT
                                                H6 (+)                                  Performance
                                                                  Adoption
        Customer Supplier Intension (CSI)                                                  (SFP)


                                              H7 (+)

         IT Support and Resources (ISR)
                                              H8 (+)


        Manufacturing Infrastructure (MFI)
                                             H9 (+)


                                              H10 (+)
            Big Data Analysis (BDA)


                                             H11 (+)
       Knowledge and Information Sharing
                    (KIS)



          External Environment Support
                     (EES)



Fig. 1  Conceptual model. Source The Author


13
     Table 1  Constructs, Sub-factors and hypothesis (+ sign indicates positive hypothesis, − sign indicates negative hypothesis)
     Hypothesis no. Factor                Description                                                  Sub-factors (Items)                    References

     H1               Security and        CoT is data focused, with physical devices connected         SAP 1: Threats and attacks             Addo-Tenkorang and Helo (2016),
                       privacy (SAP)       with smart sensors, WSN, cloud-based services. As           SAP 2: Privacy concerns                 Díaz et al. (2016)
                                           manufacturing data is accessible from anywhere, unau-
                                           thorized access to data is a big concern for manufactur-    SAP 3: Interoperability
                                           ers. With a high level of connectivity and integration,     SAP 4: Data latency
                                           security and privacy of data with no interruption of the
                                                                                                                                                                                         Annals of Operations Research




                                           manufacturing processes need to be achieved
     H2               Perceived IT        Obstacles in CoT adoption perceived by decision-makers,      PTR 1: Reliability                     Botta et al. (2016), Díaz et al. (2016),
                       security risk        business users and executives results in IT complexity,    PTR 2: Communication protocol           Narwane et al. (In Press)
                       (PTR)                integration challenges, performance, and reliability.
                                                                                                       PTR 3: Service availability
                                            Also, other predominant concerns are lack of expertise,
                                            legal and organizational issues like insufficient knowl-   PTR 4: Compliance
                                            edge, data control, and compliance
     H3               Perceived ease of   CoT offers many advantages such as ubiquitous access,        PEU 1: Transparency                    Gangwar et al. (2015)
                       use (PEU)            unlimited storage, and processing capability, data scal-   PEU 2: Visualization
                                            ability, etc. The user-friendly graphical user interface
                                                                                                       PEU 3: Traceability
                                            (GUI) and virtualization make it convenient for the
                                            native user. Research in visualization may play a criti-   PEU 4: Quality of Service
                                            cal role in manufacturing particularly for a complex
                                            product
     H4               Top management      Initial investment and interdisciplinary nature of CoT is    TMS 1: Initial investment issues      Gangwar et al. (2015), Martins et al.
                        support (TMS)       a concern of top management of SMEs. Implementa-           TMS 2: Lack of division of roles       (2016)
                      [training and         tion of the CoT system needs a considerable amount
                                                                                                       TMS 3: Resistance to change, enforce-
                        education]          of initial investment and ROI must be calculated
                                                                                                        ment
                                            beforehand. To start with test beds and lighthouse
                                            projects implementation can be done to win the trust of
                                            top management
     H5               Trust and social    In the adoption of CoT, trust in both the technology or      TSP 1: Legal and social aspect         Botta et al. (2016), Mishra et al.
                       practices (TSP)      the vendor is crucial. Concern of privacy need to be       TSP 2: Sustainability                   (2016)
                                            addressed to improve the trust of stakeholders. CoT
                                                                                                       TSP 3: Technical stability
                                            can contribute to people welfare if implemented in an
                                            effective way                                              TSP 4: Socio-organizational implica-




13
                                                                                                        tions
     Table 1  (continued)
     Hypothesis no. Factor                Description                                               Sub-factors (Items)                 References




13
     H6               Customer sup-     Network ecosystem around CoT consists of different          CSI 1: Vendor lock-in               Gangwar et al. (2015), Lounis et al.
                        plier intension  customers (SMEs, large companies, research center                                               (2016), Rekik et al. (2015)
                        (CSI)            etc.), supplier, and other systems. Customer and sup-      CSI 2: Trading partner support
                      [Competitive       plier relationship is significant for the improvement      CSI 3: Integrity
                        relative advan-  of processes, creating additional services around the
                        tage]            core product. The business model, cost structure, and      CSI 4: Economic feasibility
                                         revenue structure are key aspects for manufacturing
                                         industries
     H7               IT support and    Development of ICT specifically cloud computing is a        ISR 1: IT Enabler                   Ben-Daya et al. (2019), Zeng et al.
                        resources (ISR)  boost for SM. Considering sensors/actuators, significant   ISR 2: Sensor and actuator           (2018), Li et al. (2017)
                                         progress has been achieved for product price and qual-
                                                                                                    ISR 3: Communication
                                         ity. However, at the same time, demand for real-time
                                         control of process requirements of IT, CC, sensor and      ISR 4: Energy Considerations
                                         embedded system are also increased
     H8               Manufacturing     Manufacturing systems have evolved from Industry 2.0        MFI 1: Production Planning and      Alkhanak et al. (2015), Rekik et al.
                        infrastructure   through Industry 4.0. Manufacturing infrastructure for      Control                             (2015), Luthra et al. (2018a)
                        (MFI)            SM includes physical structure, devices for data collec-   MFI 2: Flexibility
                                         tion and communication, and data analysis. Sustainable
                                                                                                    MFI 3: Technology and Innovation
                                         manufacturing is the need of today and technologies
                                                                                                     (Product Innovation)
                                         like CC, IoT, big data, and CPS helps to achieve the
                                         same                                                       MFI 4: Lean and Agile Practices
                                                                                                    MFI 5: Green Design and Environ-
                                                                                                     ment Practices
                                                                                                    MFI 6: Quality Control
                                                                                                    MFI 7: Cost
                                                                                                    MFI 8: Purchasing and Procurement
                                                                                                     Practices
                                                                                                                                                                               Annals of Operations Research
     Table 1  (continued)
     Hypothesis no. Factor               Description                                                  Sub-factors (Items)                References

     H9               Big data analyt-   Integrity and quality (heterogeneity) of captured unstruc-   BDA 1: BDA Connectivity            Dubey et al. (2017), Ren et al.
                       ics (BDA)           tured manufacturing data is a significant challenge.                                           (2017), Wamba et al. (2017), Raut
                                           Thus BDA is a core component of SM, which connects         BDA 2: BDA Compatibility            et al. (2019)
                                           human and sensor data in the loop. Five V’s of big         BDA 3: BDA Modularity
                                           data is capable of handling issues like data quality,
                                           dynamics, dimensionality, real-time verification, and      BDA 4: BDA Planning
                                                                                                                                                                              Annals of Operations Research




                                           validation
                                                                                                      BDA 5: BDA Investment
                                                                                                      BDA 6: BDA Co-ordination
                                                                                                      BDA 7: BDA Technical Knowledge
                                                                                                      BDA 8: BDA Technology Manage-
                                                                                                       ment Capability
                                                                                                      BDA 9: BDA Control
                                                                                                      BDA 10: BDA Business Knowledge
                                                                                                      BDA 11: BDA Relational Knowledge
     H10              Knowledge and      The degree to which an organization shares insights          KIS 1: Data synchronization        Addo-Tenkorang and Helo (2016),
                       information        about their business to partners is knowledge sharing.      KIS 2: Real-time dynamics           Stergiou et al. (2018), Li et al.
                       sharing (KIS)      Endogenous and exogenous are two broad categories                                               (2018)
                                                                                                      KIS 3: Heterogeneity
                                          of knowledge. Risks in knowledge sharing through
                                          IT may include loss of information, competition, and        KIS 4: Intelligent systems
                                          dependency. Proper knowledge and information shar-
                                          ing can help organizations to gain agility as well as
                                          improvement in dynamic capability of the information
                                          transparent supply chain




13
     Table 1  (continued)
     Hypothesis no. Factor              Description                                                 Sub-factors (Items)                     References




13
     H11              External environ- Adopting CoT is useful for organizations to alter the       EES 1: Competitive Pressure             Da Xu et al. (2014), Martins et al.
                       ment support       competitive environment. Being the first mover in CoT,                                             (2016)
                       (EES)              companies can get an advantage to outclass com-           EES 2: Business Challenge (sensitive-
                                          petitors. This competitive pressure could be coercive      ness, pro-activeness)
                                          (exerted by other organizations) or normative (rules/     EES 3: Market turbulence
                                          norms) in nature. Coercive pressure is more significant
                                          to drive top management for CoT adoption                  EES 4: Social network
     H12              SMEs factory      Implementation of IoT and CC services in the smart          SFP 1: Agility                          Kang et al. (2016), Tao et al. (2018),
                       performance        factory allow efficient, safer and sustainable manu-      SFP 2: Productivity                      Zhong et al. (2017), Luthra et al.
                       (SFP)              facturing. Ubiquitous, flexibility, reconfiguration of                                             (2018b)
                                                                                                    SFP 3: Quality
                                          production, proactive maintenance, mass customiza-
                                          tion, and intelligent automation are few of performance   SFP 4: Proactive maintenance
                                          measures for SMEs                                         SFP 5: Reconfigurability
                                                                                                    SFP 6: Ubiquitous design and manu-
                                                                                                     facturing
                                                                                                    SFP 7: Mass customization
                                                                                                    SFP 8: Product digitization
                                                                                                    SFP 9: Intelligent automation

     Subfactors considered for CoT are as follows: CoT 1: Reduced costs of data acquisition, operational and maintenance, CoT 2: Enhanced customer experience, CoT 3: Scalabil-
     ity, unlimited processing, and storage, and CoT 4: Service-oriented approach [Lounis et al. (2016), Narwane et al. (In Press), Pagán et al. (2018)]
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annals of Operations Research
Annals of Operations Research


the automobile industry. Highest qualified respondents are undergraduate (167, 57.59%),
whereas 120 (41.38%) respondents are postgraduate. Maximum responses in terms of work
experience was from 5 to 10 years (148, 51.04%); turnover between 100 and 200 million
(99, 34.14%); male (192, 66.21%).


4.2 EFA

Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) is used to identify the factor structure of experiential
variables without imposing a rigid structure on the result. Five steps are involved in EFA
namely: checking data suitability, extract the factors, criteria for factor extraction, select-
ing the rotational method, and data interpretation (Williams et al. 2010). A sample size of
200–300 is relatively good (Dimitrov 2014).

4.3 CFA

Both EFA and CFA as the linear model based on normal distribution and includes meas-
ured variables, latent construct/s. For a proper and converged solution, it is suggested to use
one or more indices of goodness-of-fit (Anderson and Gerbing 1984). Various goodness-
of-fit indices are such as GFI (goodness-of-fit index), CFI (comparative fit index), RMSEA
(root means square error of approximation), etc. According to Hu and Bentler (1999)
acceptable range of these indices are as follows: (i) GFI must be equal to or more than .90
for good fit, (ii) CFI greater than or equal to .90 is desirable, (iii) Range of RMSEA, for
good fit should be in between .05 and .08; RMSEA more than .1 is poor fit. However, .08
to .1 predict an average fit, and (iv) AGFI is adjusted GFI for DoF, and its value should be
greater than .8.

4.4 SEM

SEM (Structural equation modeling) analyses multivariate data by incorporating dependent
variables (DVs), independent variables (IVs), and latent constructs (LCs). DVs and IVs can
be measured variables and may be discrete or continuous in nature. Initially, SEM was used
for marketing theory (Bagozzi 1980); however later becomes popular in almost all studies
of social and behavioral sciences (MacCallum and Austin 2000). Path analysis and CFA
are two particular types of SEM. In this study author used software package of AMOS as it
offers good quality path diagrams and capable of reading SPSS system files too.


5 Results and discussion

5.1 EFA

The survey-based approach is used to measure the firm performance of SMEs through CoT
adoption. Thirteen constructs of CoT adoption were measured through a quantitative and
qualitative survey. Measures of all 13 constraints were also found through their respective
items. The two-phase approach adopted as Phase 1-Dimension items for each one followed
construct definition. In this stage, an undefined indication of validity and reliability was


                                                                                   13
                                                                         Annals of Operations Research


Table 2  Characteristics of the   Categories                          Frequency       Percentage (%)
sample
                                  Gender
                                    Male                               192             66.21
                                    Female                             98              33.79
                                    Total                              290             100%
                                  Educational qualification
                                    Undergraduate                      167             57.59
                                    Postgraduate                       120             41.38
                                    Ph.D.                              03              1.03
                                  Total                                290             100%
                                  Job Experience (No. of Years)
                                    Less than five years               73              25.17
                                    5 to 10 years                      148             51.04
                                    More than ten years                69              23.79
                                  Total                                290             100%
                                  Size of the Organization(Regarding no. of Employees)
                                    Less than 100                      66              22.76
                                    100–200                            68              23.45
                                    200–250                            156             53.79
                                  Total                                290             100%
                                  Turnover (Revenue in million)
                                    Less than 100                      23              7.93
                                    100–200                            99              34.14
                                    200–250                            45              15.52
                                    More than 250                      123             42.41
                                  Total                                290             100%
                                  Type of manufacturing industry
                                    Automobile                         150             51.72
                                    Textile and clothing               26              8.97
                                    Electronics                        47              16.21
                                    Metals and machinery               67              23.10
                                  Total                                290             100%



also provided. Phase 2-Questionnaire was designed based on a seven-point Likert scale to
measure CoT adoption. The final survey was conducted with 290 valid responses. Testing
the suitability of collected respondent data was done using KMO and Bartlett’s Test. KMO
index ranges from 0 to 1, with a value of .5 or more is suitable for analysis; for a 95% confi-
dence level, the value of ‘p’ should be less than .05 for (Hair et al. 1995). KMO and ‘p’ for
this study are .895 and .00 respectively.
    The rotational method was used to check if a variable is related to one or more fac-
tor. Orthogonal and oblique rotations are two broad categories and based on these various
rotational methods are formulated. Thompson (2004) invented the Orthogonal Varimax
method, which is mostly used to provide a more natural interpretation and parsimonious
solution. Commonly used extraction methods for EFA and CFA are Principal components
analysis (PCA), Maximum likelihood, Principal axis factoring (PAF), Un-weighted least
squares, Generalised least squares etc. PAF and PCA are more popular in literature, with

13
Annals of Operations Research


PCA are more preferred when no previous theory exists. In this study, the author has used
PCA for extraction and Varimax rotation with Kaiser Normalization. Table 4 in Annexure-
I shows converged (after seven iterations) rotation component matrix, which indicates high
loadings of all variables (i.e. more than .5). Least loading is of CoT with .553, the highest
loading of TMS with .947 and no cross loadings were observed (discriminant validity).
Thus EFA results found satisfactory for CFA analysis.

5.2 CFA

CFA was performed on all thirteen constructs of CoT adoption. All these constructs were
allowed to correlate with one another freely. Construct SMEs factory performance has nine
items. Big Data Analytics is the only construct with more than ten items. Figure 2 shows
the measurement model. Table 5 in Annexure-II shows estimates for the CFA model. An
analysis shows the close fit of the model as X ­ 2/DoF is 1.195 (< 3.0) and RMSEA magni-
tude is .026 (< .05). GFI is less than the threshold value of .9 and AGFI magnitude is .79
is marginally less than the threshold value of .80. However, CFI is higher than .95 with a
magnitude of .975. Thus the author infers good fitness of measurement model with the col-
lected dataset.
    CFA is a theory-driven confirmatory technique used to test the convergent validity of
all items of each construct. Loading between factors and measured variables were more
than .5, whereas at 1% level all path estimates were momentous. An acceptable level of
convergent validity is shown by loading of indicators in respective constructs (Barki and
Hartwick 2001). Following loadings in measurement model namely: Flexibility (MFI2
with value of .629), Technology and Innovation (MFI3 with value of .662), Lean and Agile
Practices (MFI4 with value of .659), Cost (MFI7 with value of .659), Purchasing and Pro-
curement Practices (MFI8 with value of .634), Service-oriented approach (CoT4 with value
of .659), Competitive Pressure (EES1 with value of .659), Market turbulence (EES3 with
value of .680), and Social network (EES4 with value of .667) are below .7. However, they
are marginally less and also others loadings are not significantly harming internal consist-
ency showing satisfactory proof of convergent validity. AMOS software was used for CFA
analysis, and Fig. 2 shows the path diagram of CFA.

5.3 SEM

Path analysis is a particular case of SEM, obtained from the CFA model. Path analysis
tests how well proposed model accounts for observed relationships between the variables.
Table 6 in Annexure-III gives estimates of the structural model, and in a nutshell, it is con-
cluded that SEM analysis supports the proposed model. Analysis shows the close fit of the
model as ­X2/DoF is 1.44 (< 3.0), and RMSEA magnitude is .039 (< .05). GFI is less than
the threshold value of .9 also AGFI magnitude is .755 is less than the threshold value of
.80. CFI is with the magnitude of .941 is marginally less than .95. Thus the author infers
the fitness of the structural model with the collected dataset.
   Path analysis results show that out of twelve hypotheses,ten hypotheses are supported
while two hypotheses are not supported. Hypothesis not supported by the study is about the
positive relationship between CoT and PEOU (PEU, − .008), and IT support and resources
(ISR, − .013).
   Wang and Wang (2012) found that knowledge and information sharing can be a basis
to improve firm performance. Hypothesis based on the same (KIS, .451) affect positively

                                                                                  13
                                                                   Annals of Operations Research


to adopt CoT and smart factory, with a highest standardized estimate. With the implemen-
tation of CoT, SMEs can get advantage regarding flexibility, cost, quality, etc. and it is
supported by this study. Perceived risk is customer’s confidence with concerns about reli-
ability, availability of service (Pavlou and Gefen 2004). This study supports two hypoth-
eses based on Perceived IT Security Risk (PTR, − .104), and Security and Privacy (SAP,
− .10). Role of top management (Gangwar et al. 2015) along with trust (Narwane et al.,
in press) are crucial factors in adoption of advanced technologies and are well supported
in this work. The study supports hypotheses regarding Customer–Supplier Intension (CSI,
.032) and External Environment Support (EES, .072). Previous studies by Wamba et al.
(2017), Ren et al. (2017), and Dubey et al. (2017) shows BDA has a positive effect on firm
performance andour study also supports the same (BDA, .059) (Fig. 3).
    Based on SEM analysis, Table 3 shows the results of path analysis.
    It must be noted that few of the findings of the study contradicts with the past research
as well. This could be because of differences in topographical inspirations of country, regu-
latory authorities, and policies. The proposed research model used SEM approach for the
testing the relationship between variables. The study can provide a reference source for
future research supporting the adoption of CoT, BDA, and SM. The study will help Indian
SMEs to increase the adoption rate of CoTfor improving their overall performance. The
developed SEM model was validated by the professionals of the case manufacturing com-
panies considered in the existing work. Domain specialist confirmed and approved results
of all identified hypothesis.



6 Managerial implications

The present study is beneficial for managers of the manufacturing industry and acad-
emicians as it provides significant information about the determinants of CoT adoption
and their relationship with the firm performance of SMEs. The results are also valuable
to policymakers of developing countries in regards with SM. Many developed countries
have already launched various programs for Industry 4.0, and Indian industries must not
fall behind regarding using these advanced ICT tools. Based on this study, managers can
formulate decision making plans for the effective CoT adoption in the manufacturing
environment.
    The service providers of CoT, IoT, and BDA, can refer findings of the study for frmaing
marketing and developing policies. Role of the service provider is essential to ensure
security and associated risks. The service provider must guarantee privacy and reliability
through a service level agreement. Service providers can give a trial to enterprises on SM
activities for few weeks prior to actual implementation. This will help to get the trust of
enterprises and service provider will get prior experience on industry-specific issues before
implementation. Government organizations must encourage SMEs by spreading awareness
about the benefits of SM. This study is further anticipated to help Indian ICT to move
towards implementation of Industry4.0.
    The manufacturer can understand factors influencing CoT adoption and develop a pro-
posal to move to the smart factory. Based on selected critical factors, manufacturers can
select CC, IoT and BDA services as well as service providers proficiently. Cost is a sig-
nificant concern to SMEs due to limited budget available to them. CoT adoption helps in
reducing initial cost and installation cost (hardware and software) and thus offers a cost-
effective solution. Moreover, SMEs can focus on their core competencies and automate

13
Annals of Operations Research




Fig. 2  CFA path diagram. Source The Author



their orthodox IT facilities. With ‘knowledge and information sharing’ and ‘manufacturing
infrastructure’ are identified as the most critical factors, enterprises can further improve
their supply chain transparency.
   The proposed model is validated based on a survey conducted for manufacturing SMEs
in India. The emergence of a concept such as ‘design anywhere, manufacture anywhere’
‘Mass production to mass customization,’ and ‘automation to intelligent automation’
demand manufacturing firms to shift for CoT adoption. CoT can be the ideal way to tackle
issues like agility, reconfigurability, and proactive maintenance through its ubiquitous


                                                                                 13
                                                                    Annals of Operations Research




Fig. 3  SEM path diagram. Source The Author



design and manufacturing, and product digitization. Companies adopting CoT can get a
relative competitive advantage over their competitor as it offers advantages like closer part-
ner relationships, data analysis capabilities, better efficiency, cost-saving, etc.
   A concern like security, vendor lock-in, trading partner support, and integrity must
be addressed to bring CoT in reality for Indian SMEs. In developing countries like India,
critical issues include lack of IT resources, lack of information sharing, sufficient human
expertise, and internet bandwidth. The decision of top management is most crucial in the


13
     Table 3  Results of path analysis
     Serial no. Regression relation                                       Stand-     Sup-     In agreement with                                           In contrast with
                                                                          ardized    ported
                                                                          estimate   (Y/N)

     1          H1: There is a negative influence of Security and pri-    − .010     Yes      Díaz et al. (2016), Addo-Tenkorang and Helo (2016)
                 vacy on CoT.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Annals of Operations Research




     2          H2: There is a negative influence of Perceived IT secu-   − .104     Yes      Botta et al. (2016), Díaz et al. (2016), Narwane et al.     Jarvenpaa et al. (2000)
                 rity risk on CoT                                                              (In Press)
     3          H3: There is a positive influence of Perceived Ease of    − .008     No       Gangwar et al. (2015)
                 Use on CoT adoption.
     4          H4: There is a positive influence of Top Management        .004      Yes      Gangwar et al. (2015)
                 Support on CoT adoption.
     5          H5: There is a positive influence of Trust and Social      .087      Yes      Botta et al. (2016), Narwane et al. (In Press)
                 Practices on CoT adoption
     6          H6: There is a positive influence of Customer Supplier     .032      Yes      Rekik et al. (2015), Gangwar et al. (2015), Lounis et al.
                 Intension on CoT adoption.                                                    (2016).
     7          H7: There is a positive influence of IT Support and       − .013     No                                                                   Ben-Daya et al.
                 Resources on CoT adoption.                                                                                                                (2019), Zeng et al.
                                                                                                                                                           (2018)
     8          H8: There is a positive influence on Manufacturing         .310      Yes      Rekik et al. (2015), Alkhanak et al. (2015)
                 Infrastructure on CoT adoption.
     9          H9: There is a positive influence of Big Data Analytics    .059      Yes      Ren et al. (2016), Côrte-Real et al. (2017)
                 on CoT adoption.
     10         H10: There is a positive influence of Knowledge and        .451      Yes      Addo-Tenkorang and Helo (2016), Stergiou et al. (2018)
                 Information Sharing on CoT adoption.
     11         H11: There is a positive influence of External Environ-    .072      Yes      Jiang et al. (2016)
                 ment Support on CoT adoption.
     12         H12: There is a positive influence of CoT Adoption on      .040      Yes      Kang et al. (2016), Tao et al. (2018)
                 SMEs Factory Performance.




13
                                                                    Annals of Operations Research


adoption of new technologies. Concerns of top management are in regards to the initial
investment and resistance to change for employees. Proper training and education can
ensure smooth enforcement and proper division of roles. Trust, i.e., strong confidence can
be developed through a contract of the agreement which will define guidelines in harmony
with an efficient flow of information and improved performance for SMEs.


7 Conclusion and future work

This study identified the issues for implementation of the CoT in manufacturing SMEs
and investigated the mediating role of CoT on the performance of SMEs. The influence of
eleven factors namely security and privacy, perceived ease of use, top management sup-
port, perceived security risk, big data analytics, trust, customer–supplier intention, manu-
facturing infrastructure, IT support, knowledge sharing, and external environment support
on cloud of things was analyzed. Results indicate that big data analytics, top management
support, trust, perceived security risk, etc. require the mediating support of CoT. The pro-
posed model is validated based on a survey conducted for manufacturing SMEs in India. A
sample of 290 responses from 96 Indian SMEs was collected. Results suggest that big data
analytics, top management support, trust, perceived security risk, etc. require the mediating
support of cloud of things. For the productive work environment, there is the necessity of a
stable system and information structure, which will offer a solution which is interoperable
and secure in a transparent supply chain. The service provider must address unintended
interruptions to service, disturbances in data access, information, service stability, and
data privacy. Reliability of services can be achieved by addressing risk issues as well as
compliance with standards and protocols. Concern about the availability of service is most
prominent for SMEs. The technical stability which will guarantee CoT service under any
adverse circumstances must gain the trust of all stakeholders or transparency in the supply
chain itself. This study is useful for managers, policymakers, practitioners, and regulatory
authorities to understand the importance of information, and the cloud of things, and fur-
ther to formulate strategies to improve firm’s performance by improving the information
transparency across the value chain.
   Among limitations and future scope of the present study includes (i) Study was con-
ducted in the Indian context, and thus results cannot be generalized to other geographical
regions and underdeveloped countries. Also, the focus of the study was on the manufac-
turing SMEs. However, cross-country comparative analysis and carrying out research in
other sectors can overcome this limitation. Also, it will help to validate the findings of the
present study. (ii) Second-order SEM can be applied to analyze derived variables from real
factors like factory performance. (iii) A nonlinear predictive approach like the artificial
neural network can be used to enhance model validity.


Annexures‑I




13
Annals of Operations Research


Table 4  Rotated Component Matrix
          Component
          1       2       3      4      5      6      7      8   9   10   11   12   13

BDA3      .881
BDA4      .879
BDA2      .869
BDA9      .854
BDA1      .854
BDA11     .852
BDA8      .851
BDA7      .837
BDA6      .828
BDA5      .823
BDA10     .791
SFP1              .916
SFP8              .900
SFP3              .892
SFP7              .881
SFP2              .871
SFP6              .857
SFP4              .844
SFP9              .842
SFP5              .794
MFI5                      .748
MFI6                      .732
MFI4                      .729
MFI2                      .725
MFI8                      .716
MFI3                      .710
MFI1                      .691
MFI7                      .630
PEU1                             .917
PEU3                             .914
PEU2                             .876
PEU4                             .865
CSI1                                    .830
CSI3                                    .802
CSI2                                    .799
CSI4                                    .791
ISR1                                           .871
ISR4                                           .844
ISR2                                           .840
ISR3                                           .829
SAP2                                                  .848
SAP1                                                  .814
SAP3                                                  .784



                                                                               13
                                                                          Annals of Operations Research


Table 4  (continued)
           Component
           1       2       3      4     5    6       7      8      9       10      11     12      13

SAP4                                                 .775
PTR2                                                        .834
PTR4                                                        .834
PTR3                                                        .826
PTR1                                                        .822
KIS2                                                               .807
KIS4                                                               .765
KIS3                                                               .754
KIS1                                                               .705
TMS3                                                                       .947
TMS2                                                                       .942
TMS1                                                                       .941
TSP1                                                                               .851
TSP2                                                                               .827
TSP3                                                                               .822
TSP4                                                                               .802
CoT1                                                                                      .861
CoT2                                                                                      .847
CoT3                                                                                      .755
CoT4                                                                                      .553
EES2                                                                                              .779
EES4                                                                                              .778
EES3                                                                                              .747
EES1                                                                                              .719

Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization
a. Rotation converged in 7 iterations




13
Annals of Operations Research


Annexures‑II

Table 5  Estimates for CFA Model
Item            Construct                      Stand-     Unstand-   Standard   Critical ratio (C.R.)
                                               ardized    ardized    error
                                               estimate   estimate   (S.E.)

BDA3     <— Big data analytics                 .880       1.000
BDA4     <—     Big data analytics             .892       1.009      .045       22.393
BDA2     <—     Big data analytics             .845        .973      .049       19.970
BDA9     <—     Big data analytics             .838        .952      .048       19.632
BDA1     <—     Big data analytics             .858        .975      .047       20.608
BDA11    <—     Big data analytics             .845        .955      .048       19.988
BDA8     <—     Big data analytics             .844        .958      .048       19.948
BDA7     <—     Big data analytics             .838        .953      .049       19.653
BDA6     <—     Big data analytics             .827        .945      .049       19.143
BDA5     <—     Big data analytics             .810        .947      .051       18.400
BDA10    <—     Big data analytics             .774       1.348      .079       16.984
SFP1     <—     SMEs factory performance       .924       1.000
SFP8     <—     SMEs factory performance       .912       1.014      .037       27.181
SFP3     <—     SMEs factory performance       .898       1.006      .039       25.868
SFP7     <—     SMEs factory performance       .872        .953      .040       23.840
SFP2     <—     SMEs factory performance       .867        .973      .041       23.511
SFP6     <—     SMEs factory performance       .853        .950      .042       22.546
SFP4     <—     SMEs factory performance       .837        .952      .044       21.505
SFP9     <—     SMEs factory performance       .825        .917      .044       20.832
SFP5     <—     SMEs factory performance       .779        .880      .048       18.398
MFI5     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .788       1.000
MFI6     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .794       1.028      .072       14.285
MFI4     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .659        .801      .070       11.463
MFI2     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .629        .855      .079       10.853
MFI8     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .634        .820      .075       10.962
MFI3     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .662        .889      .077       11.508
MFI1     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .706        .975      .078       12.422
MFI7     <—     Manufacturing infrastructure   .659        .772      .067       11.453
PEU1     <—     Perceived ease of use          .919       1.000
PEU3     <—     Perceived ease of use          .914        .995      .040       25.021
PEU2     <—     Perceived ease of use          .829        .952      .047       20.051
PEU4     <—     Perceived ease of use          .840       1.083      .052       20.646
CSI1     <—     Customer supplier intension    .814       1.000
CSI3     <—     Customer supplier intension    .850       1.075      .065       16.530
CSI2     <—     Customer supplier intension    .822       1.010      .064       15.798
CSI4     <—     Customer supplier intension    .845       1.040      .063       16.390
ISR1     <—     IT support and resources       .970       1.000
ISR4     <—     IT support and resources       .976       1.000      .021       48.443
ISR2     <—     IT support and resources       .938        .957      .026       37.362
ISR3     <—     IT support and resources       .799       1.056      .050       21.121




                                                                                         13
                                                                      Annals of Operations Research


Table 5  (continued)
Item            Construct                     Stand-     Unstand-   Standard   Critical ratio (C.R.)
                                              ardized    ardized    error
                                              estimate   estimate   (S.E.)

SAP2     <—     Security and privacy          .855       1.000
SAP1     <—     Security and privacy          .912       1.065      .051       20.779
SAP3     <—     Security and privacy          .720        .805      .057       14.220
SAP4     <—     Security and privacy          .887       1.037      .052       19.880
PTR2     <—    Perceived IT security risk     .855       1.000
PTR4     <—    Perceived IT security risk     .861       1.002      .054       18.471
PTR3     <—    Perceived IT security risk     .831        .968      .055       17.456
PTR1     <—    Perceived IT security risk     .857       1.002      .055       18.339
KIS2     <—    Knowledge and information      .897       1.000
                sharing
KIS4     <—    Knowledge and information      .758        .866      .056       15.587
                sharing
KIS3     <—    Knowledge and information      .747        .869      .057       15.212
                sharing
KIS1     <—    Knowledge and information      .818        .903      .051       17.574
                sharing
TMS3     <—    Top management support         .986       1.000
TMS2     <—    Top management support         .974        .991      .017       57.707
TMS1     <—    Top management support         .975        .989      .017       58.282
TSP1     <—    Trust and social practices     .779       1.000
TSP2     <—    Trust and social practices     .773       1.076      .085       12.720
TSP3     <—    Trust and social practices     .759       1.005      .080       12.508
TSP4     <—    Trust and social practices     .766       1.108      .088       12.616
CoT1     <—    Cloud of things                .864       1.000
CoT2     <—    Cloud of things                .885       1.234      .064       19.248
CoT3     <—    Cloud of things                .839        .989      .056       17.798
CoT4     <—    Cloud of things                .659        .873      .070       12.458
EES2     <—    External environment support   .757       1.000
EES4     <—    External environment support   .667        .951      .098        9.754
EES3     <—    External environment support   .680       1.100      .111        9.906
EES1     <—    External environment support   .659        .981      .102        9.657




Annexure‑III




13
     Table 6  Estimates for the structural model
     Item                           Construct                           Standardized   Unstandardized   Standard error   Critical ratio (C.R.)   P value
                                                                        estimate       estimate         (S.E.)

     CoT              <—            Big data analytics                   .059           .037            .034              1.091                  .275
     CoT              <—            External environment support          .072           .092           .078              1.186                  .236
     CoT              <—            Manufacturing infrastructure          .310           .267           .051              5.210                      ***
     CoT              <—            Perceived ease of use               − .008         − .004           .029              − .143                 .886
                                                                                                                                                           Annals of Operations Research




     CoT              <—            Customer supplier intension           .032           .023           .041                .575                 .565
     CoT              <—            IT support and resources            − .013         − .005           .022              − .237                 .813
     CoT              <—            Security and privacy                − .010         − .006           .033              − .184                 .854
     CoT              <—            Top management support                .004           .001           .018                .081                 .936
     CoT              <—            Knowledge and information sharing     .451           .457           .061              7.544                      ***
     CoT              <—            Perceived IT security risk          − .104         − .070           .038             − 1.845                 .065
     CoT              <—            Trust and social practices            .087           .054           .036              1.502                  .133
     SFP              <—            Cloud of things                       .040           .068           .108                .636                 .525
     BDA3             <—            Big data analytics                    .880         1.000
     BDA4             <—            Big data analytics                    .891         1.008            .045             22.359                     ***
     BDA2             <—            Big data analytics                    .847           .975           .049             20.063                     ***
     BDA9             <—            Big data analytics                    .839           .953           .048             19.691                     ***
     BDA1             <—            Big data analytics                    .857           .973           .047             20.571                     ***
     BDA11            <—            Big data analytics                    .845           .955           .048             20.003                     ***
     BDA8             <—            Big data analytics                    .845           .958           .048             19.962                     ***
     BDA7             <—            Big data analytics                    .837           .952           .049             19.632                     ***
     BDA6             <—            Big data analytics                    .826           .944           .049             19.105                     ***
     BDA5             <—            Big data analytics                    .810           .947           .051             18.410                     ***
     BDA10            <—            Big data analytics                    .774         1.347            .079             16.973                     ***
     SFP1             <—            SMEs factory performance              .924         1.000
     SFP8             <—            SMEs factory performance              .912         1.013            .037             27.089                     ***




13
     SFP3             <—            SMEs factory performance              .897         1.006            .039             25.825                     ***
     Table 6  (continued)
     Item                   Construct                      Standardized   Unstandardized   Standard error   Critical ratio (C.R.)   P value
                                                           estimate       estimate         (S.E.)




13
     SFP7            <—     SMEs factory performance        .873           .954            .040             23.910                     ***
     SFP2            <—     SMEs factory performance        .868           .974            .041             23.530                     ***
     SFP6            <—     SMEs factory performance        .853           .949            .042             22.506                     ***
     SFP4            <—     SMEs factory performance        .837           .951            .044             21.483                     ***
     SFP9            <—     SMEs factory performance        .826           .918            .044             20.873                     ***
     SFP5            <—     SMEs factory performance        .778           .879            .048             18.359                     ***
     MFI5            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .788          1.000
     MFI6            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .790          1.022            .073             14.040                     ***
     MFI4            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .664           .806            .070             11.471                     ***
     MFI2            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .635           .862            .079             10.892                     ***
     MFI8            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .646           .835            .075             11.116                     ***
     MFI3            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .661           .887            .078             11.414                     ***
     MFI1            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .701           .967            .079             12.214                     ***
     MFI7            <—     Manufacturing infrastructure    .651           .762            .068             11.213                     ***
     PEU1            <—     Perceived ease of use           .921          1.000
     PEU3            <—     Perceived ease of use           .913           .993            .040             25.006                     ***
     PEU2            <—     Perceived ease of use           .829           .951            .047             20.090                     ***
     PEU4            <—     Perceived ease of use           .838          1.080            .052             20.578                     ***
     CSI1            <—     Customer supplier intension     .822          1.000
     CSI3            <—     Customer supplier intension     .851          1.065            .064             16.559                     ***
     CSI2            <—     Customer supplier intension     .819           .996            .063             15.761                     ***
     CSI4            <—     Customer supplier intension     .839          1.021            .063             16.253                     ***
     ISR1            <—     IT support and resources        .973          1.000
     ISR4            <—     IT support and resources        .974           .995            .021             48.170                     ***
     ISR2            <—     IT support and resources        .938           .955            .025             37.738                     ***
                                                                                                                                              Annals of Operations Research
     Table 6  (continued)
     Item                   Construct                           Standardized   Unstandardized   Standard error   Critical ratio (C.R.)   P value
                                                                estimate       estimate         (S.E.)

     ISR3            <—     IT support and resources             .801          1.056            .050             21.338                     ***
     SAP2            <—     Security and privacy                 .864          1.000
     SAP1            <—     Security and privacy                 .914          1.055            .050             20.953                     ***
     SAP3            <—     Security and privacy                 .723           .800            .056             14.396                     ***
                                                                                                                                                   Annals of Operations Research




     SAP4            <—     Security and privacy                 .876          1.014            .052             19.676                     ***
     PTR2            <—     Perceived IT security Risk           .856          1.000
     PTR4            <—     Perceived IT security risk           .861          1.001            .054             18.388                     ***
     PTR3            <—     Perceived IT security risk           .833           .969            .055             17.465                     ***
     PTR1            <—     Perceived IT security risk           .854           .997            .055             18.153                     ***
     KIS2            <—     Knowledge and information sharing    .913          1.000
     KIS4            <—     Knowledge and information sharing    .750           .841            .055             15.332                     ***
     KIS3            <—     Knowledge and information sharing    .736           .842            .057             14.899                     ***
     KIS1            <—     Knowledge and information sharing    .814           .884            .051             17.414                     ***
     TMS3            <—     Top management support               .986          1.000
     TMS2            <—     Top management support               .974           .991            .017             57.745                     ***
     TMS1            <—     Top management support               .975           .988            .017             58.273                     ***
     TSP1            <—     Trust and social practices           .788          1.000
     TSP2            <—     Trust and social practices           .775          1.066            .083             12.849                     ***
     TSP3            <—     Trust and social practices           .755           .988            .079             12.542                     ***
     TSP4            <—     Trust and social practices           .758          1.083            .086             12.584                     ***
     CoT1            <—     Cloud of things                      .846          1.000
     CoT2            <—     Cloud of things                      .869          1.234            .071             17.451                     ***
     CoT3            <—     Cloud of things                      .819           .988            .061             16.228                     ***
     CoT4            <—     Cloud of things                      .631           .873            .076             11.416                     ***
     EES2            <—     External environment support         .748          1.000




13
     Table 6  (continued)
     Item                          Construct                      Standardized   Unstandardized   Standard error   Critical ratio (C.R.)   P value
                                                                  estimate       estimate         (S.E.)




13
     EES4             <—           External environment support    .685           .989            .102              9.663                     ***
     EES3             <—           External environment support    .684          1.118            .116              9.646                     ***
     EES1             <—           External environment support    .647           .974            .105              9.256                     ***

     ***Are significant at P value < .001
                                                                                                                                                     Annals of Operations Research
Annals of Operations Research


References
Addo-Tenkorang, R., & Helo, P. T. (2016). Big data applications in operations/supply-chain management: A
     literature review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 101, 528–543.
Ahmadov, Y., & Helo, P. (2018). A cloud based job sequencing with sequence-dependent setup for sheet
     metal manufacturing. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 5–24.
Alkhanak, E. N., Lee, S. P., & Khan, S. U. R. (2015). Cost-aware challenges for workflow scheduling
     approaches in cloud computing environments: Taxonomy and opportunities. Future Generation Com-
     puter Systems, 50, 3–21.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1984). The effect of sampling error on convergence, improper solutions,
     and goodness-of-fit indices for maximum likelihood confirmatory factor analysis. Psychometrika,
     49(2), 155–173.
Bagozzi, R. P. (1980). Causal models in marketing. Hoboken: Wiley.
Barki, H., & Hartwick, J. (2001). Interpersonal conflict and its management in information system develop-
     ment. Mis Quarterly, 25, 195–228.
Ben-Daya, M., Hassini, E., & Bahroun, Z. (2019). Internet of things and supply chain management: a litera-
     ture review. International Journal of Production Research, 57(15–16), 4719–4742.
Botta, A., De Donato, W., Persico, V., & Pescapé, A. (2016). Integration of cloud computing and internet of
     things: A survey. Future Generation Computer Systems, 56, 684–700.
Conti, M., Dehghantanha, A., Franke, K., & Watson, S. (2018). Internet of Things security and forensics:
     Challenges and opportunities. Future Generation Computer Systems, 78, 544–546.
Côrte-Real, N., Oliveira, T., & Ruivo, P. (2017). Assessing business value of big data analytics in European
     firms. Journal of Business Research, 70, 379–390.
Da Xu, L., He, W., & Li, S. (2014). Internet of things in industries: A survey. IEEE Transactions on
     Industrial Informatics, 10(4), 2233–2243.
Davenport, T. H., Barth, P., & Bean, R. (2012). How’big data’is different. MIT Sloan Management
     Review.
de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., Jabbour, C. J. C., Foropon, C., & Godinho Filho, M. (2018a). When titans
     meet–Can industry 4.0 revolutionise the environmentally-sustainable manufacturing wave? The role of
     critical success factors. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 132, 18–25.
de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., Jabbour, C. J. C., Godinho Filho, M., & Roubaud, D. (2018b). Industry 4 and
     the circular economy: A proposed research agenda and original roadmap for sustainable operations.
     Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 273–286.
Díaz, M., Martín, C., & Rubio, B. (2016). State-of-the-art, challenges, and open issues in the integration of
     Internet of things and cloud computing. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 67, 99–117.
Dimitrov, D. M. (2014). Statistical methods for validation of assessment scale data in counseling and
     related fields. Hoboken: Wiley.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z., Wamba, S. F., et al. (2017). Can big
     data and predictive analytics improve social and environmental sustainability? Technological Forecast-
     ing and Social Change, 144, 534–545.
Esmaeilian, B., Behdad, S., & Wang, B. (2016). The evolution and future of manufacturing: A review.
     Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 39, 79–100.
Gangwar, H., Date, H., & Ramaswamy, R. (2015). Understanding determinants of cloud computing
     adoption using an integrated TAM-TOE model. Journal of Enterprise Information Management,
     28(1), 107–130.
Ghatak, S. (2010). Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in India: An appraisal. Journal of
     Technology Management & Innovation, 6(1), 66–76.
Gunasekaran, A., Yusuf, Y. Y., Adeleye, E. O., & Papadopoulos, T. (2017). Agile manufacturing prac-
     tices: The role of big data and business analytics with multiple case studies. International Journal
     of Production Research, 56(1–2), 385–397.
Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. I., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1995). Multivariate data analysis (5th ed.).
     Engle wood cliffs: Prentice Hall International.
Han, S., Huang, H., Luo, Z., & Foropon, C. (2018). Harnessing the power of crowdsourcing and Internet
     of Things in disaster response. Annals of Operations Research, 283, 1–16.
Hu, L. T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: Con-
     ventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Jour-
     nal, 6(1), 1–55.
IANS (2019). Indian government sector next big thing for Google Cloud, ET Prime. Retrieved Septem-
     ber 9, 2019 from (https​://cio.econo​micti​mes.india​times​.com/news/cloud​-compu​ting/india​n-gover​
     nment​-secto​r-next-big-thing​-for-googl​e-cloud​/70435​456.


                                                                                                13
                                                                                Annals of Operations Research


Jarvenpaa, S. L., Tractinsky, N., & Vitale, M. (2000). Consumer trust in an Internet store. Information
      Technology and Management, 1(1–2), 45–71.
Jiang, P., Ding, K., & Leng, J. (2016). Towards a cyber-physical-social-connected and service-oriented
      manufacturing paradigm. Social Manufacturing Manufacturing Letters, 7, 15–21.
Jin, X., Wah, B. W., Cheng, X., & Wang, Y. (2015). Significance and challenges of big data research. Big
      Data Research, 2(2), 59–64.
Kang, H. S., Lee, J. Y., Choi, S., Kim, H., Park, J. H., Son, J. Y., et al. (2016). Smart manufacturing: Past
      research, present findings, and future directions. International Journal of Precision Engineering
      and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 3(1), 111–128.
Li, G., Liu, W., Wang, Z., & Liu, M. (2017). An empirical examination of energy consumption, behav-
      ioral intention, and situational factors: Evidence from Beijing. Annals of Operations Research,
      255(1–2), 507–524.
Li, G., Zheng, H., Sethi, S. P., & Guan, X. (2018). Inducing downstream information sharing via manu-
      facturer information acquisition and retailer subsidy. Decision Sciences, 1–29.
Liu, P., & Yi, S. P. (2018). A study on supply chain investment decision-making and coordination in the
      Big Data environment. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 235–253.
Lounis, A., Hadjidj, A., Bouabdallah, A., & Challal, Y. (2016). Healing on the cloud: Secure cloud archi-
      tecture for medical wireless sensor networks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 55, 266–277.
Lu, Y. (2017). Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open research issues. Journal of
      Industrial Information Integration, 6, 1–10.
Luthra, S., Mangla, S. K., Chan, F. T., & Venkatesh, V. G. (2018a). Evaluating the drivers to informa-
      tion and communication technology for effective sustainability initiatives in supply chains. Interna-
      tional Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, 17(1), 311–338.
Luthra, S., Mangla, S. K., Chan, F. T., & Venkatesh, V. G. (2018b). Evaluating the drivers to informa-
      tion and communication technology for effective sustainability initiatives in supply chains. Interna-
      tional Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making, 17(01), 311–338.
MacCallum, R. C., & Austin, J. T. (2000). Applications of structural equation modeling in psychological
      research. Annual Review of Psychology, 51(1), 201–226.
Mai, V., & Khalil, I. (2017). Design and implementation of a secure cloud-based billing model for smart
      meters as an Internet of things using homomorphic cryptography. Future Generation Computer
      Systems, 72, 327–338.
Manuel, P. (2015). A trust model of cloud computing based on quality of service. Annals of Operations
      Research, 233(1), 281–292.
Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Roxburgh, C., & Byers, A. H. (2011). Big
      data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. http://www.mckin​sey.com/
      Insig​hts/MGI/Resea​rch/Techn​ology​_and_Innov​ation​/Big_data_The_next_front​ier_for_innov​ation​.
      Accessed 10 April 2019.
Martins, R., Oliveira, T., & Thomas, M. A. (2016). An empirical analysis to assess the determinants of
      SaaS diffusion in firms. Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 19–33.
McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., Davenport, T. H., Patil, D. J., & Barton, D. (2012). Big data: The manage-
      ment revolution. Harvard Business Review, 90(10), 60–68.
Mishra, D., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., & Wamba, S. (2016). Vision,
      applications and future challenges of Internet of Things: A bibliometric study of the recent literature.
      Industrial Management & Data Systems, 116(7), 1331–1355.
Narwane, V., Narkhede, B., Raut, R., Gardas, B., Priyadarshinee, P., Kavre, M. (In press). To identify the
      determinants of the CloudIoT technologies adoption in the Indian MSMEs: structural equation model-
      ling approach. International Journal of Business Information Systems.
Patel, P., & Cassou, D. (2015). Enabling high-level application development for the Internet of Things.
      Journal of Systems and Software, 103, 62–84.
Pavlou, P. A., & Gefen, D. (2004). Building effective online marketplaces with institution-based trust. Infor-
      mation Systems Research, 15(1), 37–59.
Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Christen, P., & Georgakopoulos, D. (2014). Context aware computing for the
      internet of things: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 16(1), 414–454.
Raut, R. D., Mangla, S. K., Narwane, V. S., Gardas, B. B., Priyadarshinee, P., & Narkhede, B. E. (2019).
      Linking big data analytics and operational sustainability practices for sustainable business manage-
      ment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 224, 10–24.
Rekik, M., Boukadi, K., & Ben-Abdallah, H. (2015). A decision-making method for business process out-
      sourcing to the cloud based on business motivation model and AHP. International Journal of Cloud
      Computing 2, 4(1), 47–62.




13
Annals of Operations Research


Ren, S., Fosso Wamba, S., Akter, S., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017). Modelling quality dynamics, busi-
     ness value and firm performance in a big data analytics environment. International Journal of Produc-
     tion Research, 55(17), 5011–5026.
Reyna, A., Martín, C., Chen, J., Soler, E., & Díaz, M. (2018). On blockchain and its integration with IoT:
     Challenges and opportunities. Future Generation Computer Systems., 88(2018), 173–190.
Srivastava, S. C., Mithas, S., & Jha, B. (2013). What is your global innovation strategy? IT Professional,
     15(6), 2–6.
Stergiou, C., Psannis, K. E., Kim, B. G., & Gupta, B. (2018). Secure integration of IoT and cloud comput-
     ing. Future Generation Computer Systems, 78, 964–975.
Tao, F., Qi, Q., Liu, A., & Kusiak, A. (2018). Data-driven smart manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing
     Systems, 48, 157–169.
Tao, F., Wang, Y., Zuo, Y., Yang, H., & Zhang, M. (2016). Internet of Things in product life-cycle energy
     management. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 1, 26–39.
Tao, F., Zuo, Y., Da Xu, L., & Zhang, L. (2014). IoT-based intelligent perception and access of manu-
     facturing resource toward cloud manufacturing. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 10(2),
     1547–1557.
Thompson, B. (2004). Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis: Understanding concepts and applica-
     tions. Washington: American Psychological Association.
Varghese, B., & Buyya, R. (2018). Next generation cloud computing: New trends and research directions.
     Future Generation Computer Systems, 79, 849–861.
Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J. F., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017). Big data analytics
     and firm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365.
Wang, S., Wan, J., Li, D., & Zhang, C. (2016). Implementing smart factory of industrie 4.0: An outlook.
     International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 12(1), 3159805.
Wang, Z., & Wang, N. (2012). Knowledge sharing, innovation and firm performance. Expert Systems with
     Applications, 39(10), 8899–8908.
Williams, B., Onsman, A., & Brown, T. (2010). Exploratory factor analysis: A five-step guide for novices.
     Australasian Journal of Paramedicine, 8(3), 1–13.
Zeng, D., Gu, L., & Yao, H. (2018). Towards energy efficient service composition in green energy powered
     Cyber-Physical Fog Systems. Future Generation Computer Systems. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.futur​
     e.2018.01.060.
Zhong, R. Y., Xu, X., Klotz, E., & Newman, S. T. (2017). Intelligent manufacturing in the context of indus-
     try 4.0: A review. Engineering, 3(5), 616–630.
Zissis, D., & Lekkas, D. (2012). Addressing cloud computing security issues. Future Generation computer
     systems, 28(3), 583–592.

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




                                                                                                 13
                                                                            Annals of Operations Research


Affiliations

Vaibhav S. Narwane1 · Rakesh D. Raut2 · Sachin Kumar Mangla3                   ·
Bhaskar B. Gardas4 · Balkrishna E. Narkhede5 · Anjali Awasthi6 ·
Pragati Priyadarshinee7
    Vaibhav S. Narwane
    vsnarwane@gmail.com
    Rakesh D. Raut
    rakeshraut09@gmail.com; rraut@nitie.ac.in
    Bhaskar B. Gardas
    gardas.bhaskar@gmail.com
    Balkrishna E. Narkhede
    benarkhede1@gmail.com
    Anjali Awasthi
    anjali.awasthi@concordia.ca
    Pragati Priyadarshinee
    priyadarshinee.pragati@gmail.com
1
    Department of Production Engineering, Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI), H.R
    Mahajani Marg, Matunga, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400019, India
2
    Department of Operations and Supply Chain Management, National Institute of Industrial
    Engineering (NITIE), Vihar Lake, NITIE, Powai, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400087, India
3
    Knowledge Management and Business Decision Making, Plymouth Business School, University
    of Plymouth, Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK
4
    Department of Mechanical Engineering, M.H. Saboo Siddik College of Engineering, 8, Saboo
    Siddik Polytechnic Road, Byculla, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400008, India
5
    Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Systems, National Institute of Industrial
    Engineering (NITIE), Vihar Lake, NITIE, Powai, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400087, India
6
    Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering (CIISE), Concordia University,
    Montreal H3G2W1, Canada
7
    Chaitanya Bharathi Institute of Technology (CBIT), Gandipet, Hyderabad, Telangana 500075,
    India




13
