The Journal of Supercomputing     (2025) 81:1069
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-025-07559-2




FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation
by supercomputing opportunities

Sanja Nikolic1 · Luka Filipovic2 · Tomi Ilijas3 · Milica Vukotic2

Accepted: 5 June 2025
© The Author(s) 2025



Abstract
High-performance computing (HPC) plays a significant role in accelerating digital
transformation and industry competitiveness, enabling high-speed data processing
and complex simulations through supercomputers, while cloud services make HPC
infrastructure affordable and accessible to SMEs. This research examines the poten-
tial for cloud HPC adoption in Montenegro, focusing on SME and IT companies
as key drivers of digital innovations. Using the HPC4SME Automated Assessment
Tool, a multi-criteria decision-making model, and SPSS statistical analyses, the
study evaluates company readiness, cloud potential, and HPC performance. Findings
indicate that companies are ready for HPC adoption driven by positive business out-
look, increasing demand for HPC expertise, high cloud potential, and encouraging
development in HPC critical simulations, especially in the IT sector. However, the
study’s limitations, including a relatively small market sample, highlight the need
for further research into sector-specific trends and structural barriers while empha-
sising practical drivers and policy insights to advance HPC adoption among SMEs.

Keywords HPC · Simulations · HPC4SME assessment tool · Digital
transformation · IT


1 Introduction

We are living in a digital age where a huge volume of data is processed every sec-
ond, where digital users demand everything "now and immediately", and where a
stronger computer means greater competitiveness [1, 2].


* Luka Filipovic
  luka.filipovic@udg.edu.me
1
    NCC Montenegro, University of Donja Gorica, Podgorica, Montenegro
2
    NCC Montenegro, Faculty of Information Systems and Technologies, University of Donja
    Gorica, Podgorica, Montenegro
3
    Arctur Doo, Nova Gorica, Slovenia


                                                                               Vol.:(0123456789)
1069     Page 2 of 28                                                                     S. Nikolic et al.


    Supercomputers or high-performance computers (HPCs), as one of the key ele-
ments of distributed computer systems, lead to the solution of complex problems
using computer simulations, enabling progress in practically all scientific fields—
from medicine and biology, chemistry, material science, engineering, astrophysics,
via climatology and geology, all the way to economics and social sciences [3]. HPC
is one of the key technologies that propel digital transformation, with the possibil-
ity to reduce product development time and increase the effectiveness of innovation
[4]. HPC infrastructure and services enable various industrial innovations and com-
mercial applications, generating new revenue streams, cost savings or workplaces. A
Study by Hyperion Research assessed HPC ROI1 based on average financial impacts
by 175 surveyed projects: “The average financial ROI was 509.3 dollars in revenues/
sales per dollar invested in HPC, and 47.2 dollars in profits or cost savings per dol-
lar invested in HPC” [5]. Cloud HPC can improve end-user productivity, eliminate
the need for costly upfront capital, decrease operational risks and ultimately lead to
faster time-to-market [6].
    Historically, HPC data centres have been isolated and only available to research
organisations, the government and companies that have very large budgets [7]. HPC
offers the potential for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) to engage in prod-
uct innovation, service improvement and resource optimisation [8]. However, the
expensive HPC infrastructure and knowledge gaps can make it inaccessible to SMEs
[9]. HPC market growth and industry uptake will be strongly driven by the expand-
ing adoption of Cloud HPC offerings, bringing multiple benefits such as accessibil-
ity, scalability, flexibility or, in economic terms considering elasticity (on-demand
provisioning), best performance/cost ratio (pay-as-you-go) and trading CAPEX2 for
OPEX [10, 11]. Most SMEs are primarily transitioning to numerical simulations and
complex data analytics [12, 13]. They need access to HPC-powered infrastructure,
HPC cloud-based services [14–16], training and expertise in the transition towards
new business models of the digital economy [17, 18]

1.1 SME importance and HPC relevance for the digital economy

In today’s competitive business environment, the adoption of advanced digital
technologies is becoming synonymous with survival, success and sustainability
[19]. Technology adoption can support companies, especially SMEs, to grow,
scale and strengthen industry competitiveness [20]. SMEs not only drive job crea-
tion and income generation but also contribute to technological advancements and
innovative practices [21, 22], being central to national economic growth. Accord-
ing to the Annual Report on European SMEs 2023/2024 [23], there were 25.8
million SMEs3 (99,8% of enterprises) in the EU countries (EU-27), employing


1
  ROI = Return of Investment.
2
  CAPEX = Capital Expenditures; OPEX = Operational Expenditures.
3
  According to the official European Commission (EC) definition, SMEs are enterprises that have fewer
than 250 employees, and either an annual turnover of up to EUR 50 million or a balance sheet total of up
to EUR 43 million.
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                   Page 3 of 28   1069


88.7 million people, contributing two-thirds of employment (65,2%) and slightly
more than half to the value added (53.1%).
   As the driving force of the economy, SMEs are advancing and accelerating
digital transformation efforts [24]. Digital transformation is revolutionising prod-
ucts, processes and interactions across organisations [25, 26], leading to increased
productivity, sales and innovations [24, 27–30]. HPC computational power drives
digital transformation by enhancing research and development (R&D) and invest-
ments and by elevating capital marginal returns [31]. The implementation of HPC
for modelling, simulations and analysis of industrial processes has the potential
to serve as a key driver for the innovation and competitiveness of SMEs [32, 33].
According to Suklan’s regional survey [17] involving 94 companies (70.4% of
which were SMEs), companies adopt HPC solutions mainly to improve efficiency,
accelerate processes, reduce costs, support the development of new products or
services and enhance business innovation processes. Furthermore, HPC is pri-
marily used for research and development, engineering and design, manufactur-
ing or production and large-scale data management [17]. Despite the HPC poten-
tial across various industry sectors and its benefits for companies, the adoption of
advanced technologies among SMEs and entrepreneurs has remained relatively
slow [34].
   Currently, within the framework of EU programmes, there are multiple projects
and initiatives which promote HPC usage and support SME onboarding, e.g. PRACE
[35], FF4EuroHPC [36] and EUROCC [37]. Within the EUROCC project (focused
on establishing National Competence Centres—NCCs and providing access to high-
end European supercomputers), multiple sectoral studies, country studies and best
practice analyses were conducted related to HPC needs, usage and benefits for aca-
demia, industry and the public sector [37]. A study conducted in Greece explored
HPC users’ profiles, familiarity levels and training needs, focusing on academic
users [38]. The HPC maturity model, as a structured process to assess HPC experi-
ence levels and upscaling potential of SMEs, was developed in Turkey [39]. Studies
conducted in Bulgaria explored challenges in developing a national HPC ecosystem,
proposing fine-grained HPC/HPDA/AI competence mapping and an agile approach
to supercomputing infrastructure acquisition [40–42]. The first pan-European HPC
Master Programme was established in Luxembourg to train the next generation of
HPC experts [43]. Reports on Success Stories highlight successful applications of
HPC and AI across various industry domains [44] or focus on sector-specific devel-
opments and case studies enabled by HPC [45].
   While the implementation of advanced digital technologies has been extensively
discussed, only a scarce volume of literature has addressed the adoption and usage
of HPC services among SME [46]. Although several EU initiatives aim to promote
HPC usage among SMEs, there is limited research on its effectiveness—how these
initiatives can be further explored to support SMEs and enhance HPC usage [47].
Furthermore, the current HPC-related research reveals a significant gap between
technological advancements and their practical adoption by SMEs [16]. The gap
between technical capabilities and practical needs arises due to the complexity of
HPC architectures, the steep learning curve and the lack of domain-specific optimi-
sation strategies [48].
1069   Page 4 of 28                                                       S. Nikolic et al.


1.2 Digital transformation and innovation in Montenegro

Digital transformation is a strategic priority in Montenegro, as a cornerstone of
its economic and social development, particularly in the context of its EU acces-
sion efforts [49]. Montenegro (MNE) leads the Western Balkan (WB) countries in
the Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) (35.1) demonstrating high scores
in Integration of Digital Technology (MNE = 8.5, WB average = 5,2 and EU aver-
age = 9), Human Capital (MNE = 10.4, WB average = 8.4 and EU average = 11.4)
and Connectivity (MNE = 10.4, WB average = 7.5 and EU average = 15) [50]. Inno-
vations in Montenegro are strongly supported by digital transformation processes,
the adoption of advanced technologies and EU project initiatives. According to the
European Innovation Scoreboard, Montenegro is an Emerging Innovator with inno-
vative performance at 47.5% of the EU average, demonstrating relative strengths in
SME-driven product and business process innovation. Despite its regional competi-
tiveness, it lags behind EU countries, implying the need for greater adoption of digi-
tal technologies and computational capacities in business sectors [2].
   Montenegro has recognised the potential of digital entrepreneurship to drive
innovation and smart growth, especially in the IT sector, and its potential for the
adoption of cloud HPC services. ICT Cortex-Cluster for Information Technology,
Innovation, Education, Design and Technological Development of Montenegro,
analysed the business results of the 30 most successful IT companies in Montene-
gro. The total revenues of the analysed top 30 IT companies in 2020 amounted to
€56,256,439 (18% YoY growth), while the total profit doubled compared to 2019
and amounted to €10,916,675 [51].


1.3 Research novelty and key contributions

While existing studies have explored the HPC development, impact and benefits
driven by various technology frameworks [52–56], scientific development [57–60]
and large industries [61, 62], there has been limited examination and empirical evi-
dence of HPC adoption among SMEs, especially in the context of digital transfor-
mation in developing countries. In these resource-constrained regions, companies
experience additional challenges such as underdeveloped digital infrastructure,
limited access to technologies and lack of technical expertise, which can affect the
effective adoption of HPC technologies. To better understand the potential for HPC
adoption among SMEs, this study effectively aligns with the established technol-
ogy adoption theories, specifically Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) [63], the Technol-
ogy–Organisation–Environment (TOE) framework [64, 65] and the Resource-Based
View (RBV).
   Koller et al. [66] highlighted HPC’s disruptive potential, emphasising its evolu-
tion from a tool for solving complex industrial problems to a widely adopted tech-
nology that boosts business competitiveness and fosters innovation [46]. The DOI
theory also suggests that SMEs may be slower in adopting advanced technologies
like HPC due to their higher sensitivity to external pressures and limited resources,
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                     Page 5 of 28   1069


such as market demand or financial challenges [67]. HPC drives innovation by offer-
ing better solutions to societal challenges and enhancing industrial competitiveness
[68]. The TOE provides the theoretical framework for understanding SME-specific
challenges, explaining how HPC adoption can be shaped over the technological,
organisational and environmental contexts. SME adoption of advanced technologies
like HPC is shaped by the combination of technological (relative advantage, com-
patibility, complexity, trialability and observability) [69, 70], organisational (digi-
tal skills, innovation strategies and infrastructure readiness) [71] and environmental
factors (industry conditions and competitive market) [16, 20]. The Resource-Based
View (RBV) [72] highlights the strategic importance of HPC technology as a valu-
able resource that can provide SMEs with a competitive advantage.
   This paper presents the findings of a pilot study conducted within the framework
of the EuroCC project, which explores the potential for HPC adoption among SMEs
in Montenegro. The study, carried out between Q3 2021 and Q1 2022, aimed to
assess HPC-related awareness, competencies and capacities in Montenegro based
on an industry-diversified market sample. It employed both qualitative analyses
and quantitative methods, alongside the HPC4SME automated assessment tool, to
collect primary data and provide market-driven insights into the potential for HPC
adoption in Montenegro.
   This paper addresses an underexplored literature gap and empirical perspective in
examining SMEs’ adoption of HPC technologies, particularly within the IT sector
standing at the forefront of digital transformation in Montenegro [73–75]. It further
discusses the following research questions:

   RQ1 What are the key drivers and barriers influencing the adoption of HPC tech-
   nologies among SMEs in Montenegro?
   RQ2 How does the HPC4SME assessment tool support stakeholders and policy-
   makers in integrating HPC into the innovation ecosystem and digital agenda?

   A key contribution of this study is the development of a theoretically grounded
and empirically verified methodological framework for assessing HPC readiness
among SMEs across various industries. This research deepens the understanding of
how innovation characteristics, environmental context, organisational factors and
technological capacities influence the adoption of HPC technologies by Montene-
grin SMEs. The study introduces the HPC4SME assessment tool and taxonomy,
which evaluates HPC adoption potential across three critical dimensions: organisa-
tional readiness, cloud integration potential and HPC performance capabilities. The
findings promote HPC adoption as an accelerator of digital transformation and one
of the key drivers of innovation and competitiveness for SMEs operating in develop-
ing markets like Montenegro.
   The paper is structured as follows: The Introduction provides the practical con-
text, theoretical foundations and a review of literature related to HPC relevance and
SME adoption of digital technologies. The methodology section details the HPC-
4SME assessment framework, the market sample and applied quantitative and quali-
tative methodologies. The Results and Discussion section provides a comprehensive
analysis of the research sample across three dimensions: organisational readiness,
1069     Page 6 of 28                                                     S. Nikolic et al.


cloud integration potential and HPC technical performance, followed by a discus-
sion of the results and their implications. The Conclusion summarises the study’s
key findings, theoretical and practical contributions, limitations and suggests direc-
tions for future research.


2 Methodology

The HPC4SME Automated Assessment Tool is a digital platform designed to evalu-
ate the potential and readiness of European SMEs to adopt cloud HPC solutions.
The HPC4SME assessment tool was developed by the company Arctur Ltd. within
the H2020 Sesame.net project [76] through the synthesis of a theoretical frame-
work (multi-criteria assessment model using design science research approach) and
empirical validation process (SME-related HPC projects: Cloud Flow [77], iFMS
[78] and Fortissimo [79]). The structured questionnaire and HPC4SME assessment
framework were updated during the H2020 EuroCC project [37].
   Market research and analysis on the potential use of HPC technologies in Mon-
tenegro were conducted in the period from 3Q 2021 to 1Q 2022. Online access to
the HPC4SME Automated Assessment Tool was provided to all potentially inter-
ested organisations from the business, academia and public sectors, to be filled up
by senior managers or researchers with relevant experience and expertise in digital
technologies.
   After completing the online questionnaire through the HPC4SME Automated
Assessment Tool, the company receive an automatically generated self-evaluation
report, providing customised analysis of "if" and "how" it can benefit from access




Fig. 1  The HPC4SME assessment tool and process, Arctur Ltd. [80]
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                Page 7 of 28   1069


to HPC/supercomputing services (Fig. 1). The HPC4SME Assessment Process
Report consists of textual elaboration of analysed answers and graphical posi-
tioning related to companies’ overall readiness, cloud and HPC usage potential,
including a set of technical and business recommendations. The assessment of
companies’ readiness to use cloud and HPC technologies is treated as a complex
decision-making problem, which is solved by applying a multi-criteria decision-
making model built based on the DEX (Decision EXperts) methodology [81].
DEX belongs to the qualitative methodology of decision modelling, with multiple
attributes, based on the integration of a multi-criteria decision model (MADM)
with rule-based expert systems [82] and utility functions based on hierarchical
aggregated values [8].
   In the Montenegrin pilot study, the HPC4SME Automated Assessment Tool
was successfully applied to collect data from 53 registered companies (out of
70 initially targeted) for market research and competence mapping. The market
sample structure is industrially diversified but intentionally dominated by SMEs,
which represent 74% of the market sample, and the IT sector, with a 35.8%
share (ICT 37.5%), as shown in Fig. 2. In the structure of the sample, there is a




Fig. 2  Structure of the market sample in Montenegro
1069       Page 8 of 28                                                     S. Nikolic et al.


primary orientation to the SME sector and IT cluster, as they have been recog-
nised as drivers of digital transformation and “early adopters”/ “fast followers” of
advanced technologies.
   The market survey is based on the HPC4SME structured questionnaire with 32
multiple-choice, closed questions, grouped into three main dimensions to determine:
(1) Organisational readiness—understanding of HPC (simulations) benefits and
willingness to use HPC solutions, (2) Cloud integration potential—experience and
confidence in using services in the cloud and (3) HPC performance—computational
needs and technical capacities. Furthermore, questions are formulated in parallel for
the current standing and future expectations (up to 5 years) to identify HPC trends.
   SPSS4 software was additionally used to provide in-depth analyses of primary
market data and HPC adoption patterns. Cross-tabulation is applied to analyse
relationships between selected categorical variables by comparing their distribu-
tions within contingency tables [83]. Statistical validation was carried out using the
Chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test, the latter being preferred for improved accu-
racy in small sample sizes. In both tests, a p-value below 0.05 indicated statistical
significance.
   A mixed-methods approach was employed, combining qualitative, quantitative
and comparative analyses of primary data collected through a market survey. This
analysis was further enriched by business and technical recommendations derived
from automatically generated HPC4SME company reports, along with professional
insights from HPC experts gathered through semi-structured interviews, academic
workshops and business roundtables conducted during the implementation of the
EuroCC project. The quantitative survey data provided broad insights into organi-
sational, environmental and technical factors influencing HPC adoption, including
perceived benefits, competitive trends, infrastructure capacities, digital skills, cloud
integration, data management and HPC technical performance. Qualitative obser-
vations and open-ended responses collected through industry interactions and com-
pany consultations provided valuable context, enabling a deeper understanding of
the underlying needs, barriers and organisational dynamics shaping HPC-related
decision-making.


3 Results and discussion

3.1 Organisational readiness of the Montenegrin companies

The first part of the market survey analyses the answers that should provide induc-
tive insights into HPC ecosystem potential, driven by internal and external factors,
including innovation potential, business understanding, technical capabilities and
HPC knowledge/expertise.
   Regarding the applicability (potential) and adoption (implementation) of HPC-
powered computer simulations in their respective industry sectors, 8 out of 10


4
    Statistical Package for the Social Sciences.
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                    Page 9 of 28   1069




Fig. 3  Importance of simulations in new product development


Table 1  Statistical test results:   Chi-Square Tests
Relationship between the
applicability of computer                                  Value     Df    Asymptotic          Exact
simulations in respective                                                  Significance        Sig.
sectors and the importance of                                              (2-sided)           (2-sided)
simulations in new product
development                          Pearson Chi-Square    23.585a   4     .000                .000
                                     Likelihood Ratio      21.014    4     .000                .000
                                     Fisher’s Exact Test   18.587                              .000
                                     N of Valid Cases      53
                                     a
                                      Five cells (55.6%) have an expected count of less than 5. The mini-
                                     mum expected count is 1.51


companies consider them applicable (60%) or have great potential (21%), and 5 out
of 10 companies believe in medium (32%) or high (17%) adoption rates. Consider-
ing future perspectives, positive expectations are evidenced with the gap between
perceived applicability (96%) and anticipated adoption (84%) gradually narrowing.
   Most of the surveyed companies recognise the importance/potential of using
computer simulations in new product development (15% as crucial and 2/3 as pos-
sible), while in the future, 4 out of 10 companies consider that simulations will be of
crucial importance for their innovative performance, as shown in Fig. 3.
   Entering simulation-based new product development, especially for SMEs, may
require a significant increase in research and development (R&D) expenditures.
According to the surveyed results, 45% of companies currently allocate more than
5% of annual revenues to R&D and innovation activities. This can be related to offi-
cial statistics, where 56.2% of companies introduced product or process innovation
in Montenegro in the period from 2018 to 2020 [84].
1069     Page 10 of 28                                                    S. Nikolic et al.


   Furthermore, a strong and statistically significant association between the appli-
cability of simulation in a sector and its perceived importance in new product
development is indicated by the Chi-square test (p = 0.000) and Fisher’s exact test
(p = 0.000) (Table 1).
   The majority of assessed companies who consider simulation “applicable” to
their sector (26 out of 32) rated it as “possibly” important for new product develop-
ment. Among those who believe simulation has “great potential”, there is a higher
proportion (5 out of 11) rating it as “crucial”, suggesting that while HPC simulation
may not yet be integrated, those companies who see its potential in respective indus-
try sector recognise its high importance in contributing to product innovation. Con-
versely, most respondents who view simulation as “not applicable” consider it “not
important” for new product development, reinforcing the link between simulation
applicability in respective sectors and perceived innovation value.
   Regarding current and future competitive edge (Fig. 4), 4 out of 10 Montenegrin
companies (44%) in the present and 6 out of 10 (61%) in future believe that com-
petitors successfully utilise computer simulation to develop new products, or at least
they claim so.
   In addition to innovation potential and industry competitiveness, the deploy-
ment of HPC-powered simulations brings positive marketing, business and financial
effects. According to the survey results, 80% of companies believe in the positive
marketing value of using HPC simulation tools and techniques. Products and ser-
vices developed or improved by “supercomputers” can be more market attractive,
supporting competitive advantages and premium pricing. Furthermore, 8 out of 10
companies currently believe in positive business effects, such as product or process
improvement, cost reduction, faster time to market or increased market share.
   Concerning financial impact, 30% of companies in the research sample cur-
rently expect positive ROI, while in future, that number is more than double (69%),
as shown in Fig. 5. Cloud-based HPC business models provide access to scalable




Fig. 4  Perceived competitiveness in computer simulations
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                 Page 11 of 28   1069




Fig. 5  Perceived ROI from computing simulations




Fig. 6  In-demand HPC expertise: infrastructure, parallel programing and simulation



HPC resources only when needed, paying for just the amount of resources required,
without costly investment in HPC infrastructure setup, maintenance and software
licences. HPC empowers superior performance, allowing companies to do more
while spending less [85].
   Considering the assessment of the level of knowledge and expertise on HPC
infrastructure, parallel programming and simulations, more than half of the
assessed companies currently do not have internal simulation expertise (53%) or
1069     Page 12 of 28                                                      S. Nikolic et al.




Fig. 7  Present state of computing infrastructure and simulation software


only have basic knowledge of parallel programming (57%) and HPC infrastruc-
ture (53%). However, following emerging trends in future, significant expecta-
tions are evidenced in advancing computing simulation expertise (from 6 to 45%),
parallel programming (from 8 to 49%) and infrastructure knowledge (from 13 to
55%), as illustrated in Fig. 6.
   In addition to concerns related to in-house expertise, surveyed companies face
a problem of insufficient (43%) or too expensive (38%) HPC expertise. These
market insights and future trends in HPC knowledge and expertise provide empir-
ical evidence for necessary investment in HPC-related educational curricula and
professional training to generate in-demand, digital competencies for high-tech
jobs in future.
   To understand HPC overall readiness, it is also necessary to analyse the tech-
nical capacities of MNE companies, which means available hardware (HW) and
software (SW) solutions, in the context of promoting asset-light business mod-
els (Cloud HPC). With ubiquitous Big Data, there is a compelling need to make
HPC technologically and economically accessible, easy to use and operation-
ally democratised [54]. Cloud service models provide significant cost reduction
opportunities, the transition from CAPEX to OPEX cost structure (savings on
equipment, location, maintenance and IT personnel), the flexibility of acquiring
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                 Page 13 of 28   1069


services on-demand and through the pay-per-use model, greater scalability, agil-
ity and mobility of business, and global collaboration [10, 87].
   Figure 7 shows that currently, 50% of surveyed companies use some form of
remote access to computer infrastructure managed by 3rd parties (1/3 combined and
21% Cloud service models). From the aspect of applied software solutions, the com-
bination of software is also the most common option, practised by 1/3 of compa-
nies. Following future trends, the combination of internal and external HW (53%)
and SW (60%) solutions is becoming the preferable choice of assessed companies
in Montenegro. Furthermore, currently, 7 out of 10 companies consider it Possible
(32%) or Very likely (38%) to rent HW or SW resources, i.e. to base their business
models on asset-light and cost-effective cloud service models.
   A deeper analysis using statistical tests found no strong association between
available computing infrastructure and expertise in HPC simulations, as the Chi-
square test (p = 0.102) and Fisher’s exact test (p = 0.154) are both above the 0.05
significance level (Table 2).
   Notably, those with advanced expertise are only found in organisations using a
combination of infrastructures (3 cases), indicating a willingness to rent comput-
ing resources from third-party providers. The high proportion of low expected
counts (60%) makes Fisher’s exact test more appropriate, but even it does not con-
firm significance. This would be beneficial to further explore in the context of a big-
ger sample or a more specific context. While the statistical tests indicate no strong
association between computing infrastructure and HPC expertise, the data do sug-
gest a nuanced relationship where advanced expertise is more likely to be found in
organisations that utilise a combined approach to computing resources—supporting
the case of Cloud utilisation. No significance may further indicate missing high-
end supercomputing infrastructure. This implies the importance of HPC policies
and projects providing companies with subsidised access to the supercomputing
infrastructure.

3.2 CLOUD integration potential of the Montenegrin companies

The use of HPC computational power, processing speed and extensive capacities
is becoming available to all industries and businesses thanks to cloud computing.


Table 2  Statistical test          Chi-Square Tests
results: Relationship between
the available computing                                  Value     Df     Asymptotic         Exact
infrastructure and the expertise                                          Significance       Sig.
in HPC simulations                                                        (2-sided)          (2-sided)

                                   Pearson Chi-Square    13.303a   8      .102               .087
                                   Likelihood Ratio      13.456    8      .097               .115
                                   Fisher’s Exact Test   10.369                              .154
                                   N of Valid Cases      53

                                   A total of 9 cells (60.0%) have an expected count of less than 5. The
                                   minimum expected count is .17
1069     Page 14 of 28                                                         S. Nikolic et al.


Cloud HPC’s operational (on demand) and billing (pay as you go) models will sig-
nificantly facilitate the innovative potential and industry competitiveness of SMEs.
Today, approximately 70% of organisations surveyed have integrated Cloud into
their HPC practices, with over 50% reporting consistent usage [6].
   In the second part of the research, the goal is to assess how capable, demanding
and confident are surveyed companies in Montenegro considering using Cloud com-
puting services.
   HPC workloads, real-time interactions and simulation duration require high-
bandwidth and low-latency networks [87]. Being asked, “How severe would be
the rate of data transfer in and out of the remote site in your most computationally
intensive simulation”, every 2nd surveyed company (51% in the present and 48%
in future) expected that data transfer would be at a moderate level (10–100 Mbps
connections should be sufficient to use a remote Data Centre). High data transfer is
expected in future by 18% of companies, demanding internet connections of at least
100 Mbps.
   Figure 8 shows that 58% of surveyed companies assume a normal level of inter-
action during the computer simulation, which means that a "response time" within
10 min is considered acceptable. However, in the next 5 years, 30% of companies
will find that the time of obtaining simulation results is very important, and it will
be measured in milliseconds, indicating the need for high-speed data processing and
computation.
   Regarding data confidentiality concerns, approximately 40% of companies in
Montenegro have a restrictive treatment of simulation data, both inputs and results.
Highly sensitive data are expected to have a maximum of 24% of companies even in
future (input data: from 21% in the present to 24% in future, and output data: from
17% in the present to 20% in future).




Fig. 8  Data processing demand implying bandwidth and latency considerations
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                 Page 15 of 28   1069




Fig. 9  Dealing with company data in a trustworthy manner


Table 3  Statistical test results:   Chi-Square Tests
Relationship between data
confidentiality and trust in HPC                           Value     Df   Asymptotic         Exact
providers                                                                 Significance       Sig.
                                                                          (2-sided)          (2-sided)

                                     Pearson Chi-Square    12.645a   6    .049               .044
                                     Likelihood Ratio      12.407    6    .053               .084
                                     Fisher’s Exact Test   10.697                            .064
                                     N of Valid Cases      53

                                     a. Eight cells (66.7%) have an expected count of less than 5. The
                                     minimum expected count is .91


   Trust and data security can be critical factors in deciding whether a company will
rent infrastructures from the 3rd party HPC Data centres. Most HPC Data centres
have security standards and strict procedures for data transfer administration, storage
and backup. The data management policy can be further regulated through an NDA
(Non-Disclosure Agreement) or by undertaking additional protection measures (data
encryption or data anonymisation).
   According to the responses of Montenegrin companies, there are Acceptable
risks (57%) and overall Trust (32%) concerning data management by HPC cloud
providers, with positive trends in future (Fig. 9). The parallel view on “trust issues”
between HPC providers, Telecom providers and Internet security emphasises that
this type of concern should be treated on the comparable level of risk to which we
expose company data when they are transmitted through telecom providers or stored
on the Internet.
   The Chi-square test (p = 0.049) suggests a statistically significant relationship
between data confidentiality and trust in HPC providers, although Fisher’s exact
1069     Page 16 of 28                                                     S. Nikolic et al.


test (p = 0.064) indicates that this association is weaker when accounting for low
expected counts (66.7% below 5) (Table 3).
   The data show that those handling highly sensitive data have mixed trust levels,
with almost equal distribution between acceptable risk (5), distrust (3) and trust (3).
In contrast, respondents working with public/open data mostly trust their HPC pro-
vider (6 out of 8), while those with restricted-use data lean towards acceptable risk
(14 out of 21). Distrust is relatively low overall (6 out of 53), which is very impor-
tant for cloud HPC adoption. Overall results suggest a moderately strong connection,
but certain researchers also addressed mixed quantitative and qualitative findings
related to the impact of data confidentiality on HPC adoption through cloud-based
services [88].

3.3 HPC performance capacities of the Montenegrin companies

The third part of the market survey refers to the critical HPC performance, indi-
cating an immediate technical capability of HPC usage. With regard to the actual
utilisation rate of in-house computing infrastructure, currently, 1 out of 10 compa-
nies (9%) use more than 70% of in-house infrastructure, but in future, expectations
increase to 26%. If a company’s infrastructure incurs high costs of energy, technical
maintenance or software licenses, cloud-based HPC resources can be cost-effective
business decisions.
   According to the surveyed data, 72% of Montenegrin companies do not know
the number of CPUs/cores used in parallel processing or have very modest perfor-
mance (< 16 cores), currently not reaching HPC critical performance. Only 4% of
companies use more than 1024 cores for their simulation software at the level of
HPC parallel processing. In future period, 40% of companies using over 16 cores




Fig. 10  No CPUs/cores used in parallel processing
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                 Page 17 of 28   1069


of multicore processors were recorded by the survey, which confirms growing HPC
trends/demands, Fig. 10.
   By exploring the tangible connection between the level of parallel programming
knowledge for simulation software on HPC and actual utilisation of parallel pro-
cessing software, the Chi-square test (p = 0.000) and Fisher’s exact test (p = 0.000)
indicate a statistically significant relationship (Table 4).
   The majority of researched companies with no knowledge of parallel program-
ming (19 out of 19) either do not use or are unaware of parallel processing software.
Respondents with advanced knowledge are more likely to use higher core counts
(128 + cores). Due to 75% of cells having low expected counts, Fisher’s exact test
is the most reliable, further confirming this strong association. The findings sug-
gest that greater expertise in parallel programming is linked to higher core usage in
simulations, confirming the premise for digital upskilling [49] to increase the utilisa-
tion of knowledge-intensive HPC infrastructure or address barriers hindering HPC
adoption.
   With regard to the frequency of simulation usage, 58% of the surveyed companies
do not currently perform computer simulations, or they rarely do. Currently, 17% of
companies perform simulations on a weekly or daily basis, but expectations increase
to 44% in future. If companies perform simulations on a daily or weekly basis, they
should consider renting HPC resources compared to the cost of maintaining their
infrastructure.
   Concerning the duration of simulation usage, as shown in Fig. 11, 75% of compa-
nies use < 100 core hours.
   Only 2% of companies currently and 6% in future expect that the typical duration
of performed simulation will be over 100,000 core hours. If these companies do not
plan to perform simulations for more than 2 months on regular computers, access to
HPC resources should be of immediate consideration.
   Finally, testing the statistical relationship between the frequency of performing
simulations (indicating higher HPC needs) and investments in research and develop-
ment is important in understanding the drivers of HPC adoption. The Chi-square test
(p = 0.139) and Fisher’s exact test (p = 0.061) indicate no strong statistical associa-
tion between a company’s R&D investment level and frequency of performing simu-
lation, indicating higher HPC utilisation (Table 5).


Table 4  Statistical test results:   Chi-Square test
Relationship between level
of parallel programming                                    Value     Df   Asymptotic         Exact
knowledge for simulation                                                  Significance       Sig.
software utilisation of parallel                                          (2-sided)          (2-sided)
processing software
                                     Pearson Chi-Square    27.337a   6    .000               .003
                                     Likelihood Ratio      24.968    6    .000               .000
                                     Fisher’s Exact Test   20.496                            .000
                                     N of Valid Cases      53
                                     a
                                     Nine cells (75.0%) have an expected count less than 5. The mini-
                                     mum expected count is .15
1069      Page 18 of 28                                                                    S. Nikolic et al.




Fig. 11  Duration of computing simulations




Table 5  Statistical test results:   Chi-Square Tests
Relationship between frequency
of performing simulations and                              Value    Df     Asymptotic          Exact
investments in R&D                                                         Significance        Sig.
                                                                           (2-sided)           (2-sided)

                                     Pearson Chi-Square    9.670a   6      .139                .130
                                     Likelihood Ratio      10.694   6      .098                .153
                                     Fisher’s Exact Test   10.391                              .061
                                     N of Valid Cases      53
                                     a
                                     Eight cells (66.7%) have an expected count of less than 5. The mini-
                                     mum expected count is .57




   Although Fisher’s test suggests a possible weak relationship, considering the
proximity of the p-value to the significance level, it is worth further investiga-
tion, particularly in larger samples or in different contexts. The data reveal that
companies investing less than 3% in R&D are mostly those that rarely or never
perform simulations (16 out of 19). In contrast, companies investing more than
5% in R&D have a more balanced distribution, with eight performing simula-
tions monthly and 4 weekly, though 11 still rarely or never use simulations.
This suggests that higher R&D investment may be associated with increased
simulation usage and HPC needs, but the lack of statistical significance implies
that other factors may also play a role. Although 45% of the researched com-
panies allocate more than 5% of annual revenue to R&D and innovation activi-
ties, Montenegro still lacks significant HPC adoption in connection with these
investments.
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                    Page 19 of 28   1069


3.4 Evaluation of HPC research results for the Montenegrin companies

By applying the methodology of HPC4SME evaluation reports to the top answers of
53 surveyed companies, it is possible to graphically present the overall cloud HPC
potential of a research sample of the Montenegrin market.
   The assessment of the overall potential for cloud HPC adoption is structured
across three dimensions/criteria (Readiness, Cloud and HPCl), each corresponding
to specific attributes evaluated through a series of questions (based on multi-criteria
decision-making model/DEX methodology).
   The Readiness dimension/criterion, represented by the red colour of "persimmon
fruit" (red = ready, yellow = basic and green = not ready), illustrates the willing-
ness of the companies to integrate HPC technologies into their business operations
(based on aggregated answers related to internal and external organisational factors).
   The Cloud dimension/criterion is captured along the vertical axis on a four-level
scale (“No potential”, “Low potential”, “Fair potential” and “High potential”),
where higher values signify a greater capacity for leveraging cloud-based HPC solu-
tions (based on aggregated answers related to necessary cloud capacities and data
privacy considerations).
   The HPC dimension/criterion is captured along the Y-axis on the same four-level
scale, where higher values indicate immediate HPC needs (based on aggregated
answers related to critical simulation performance for utilising HPC infrastructure).
   These dimensions are visualised in the graphs in Fig. 12, where each data point
reflects the comprehensive evaluation of a company’s Readiness, Cloud and HPC
potential based on the applied methodology of the HPC4SME assessment frame-
work, and associated arrows indicate expected trends based on answers related to the
future period.
   By utilising this methodological approach on a demonstrated market sample of
Montenegro, it is concluded that:

(1) In general, companies are ready to use HPC technologies because they:
   • Have a positive attitude towards applying computer simulations in their
       respective industries (8 out of 10);
   • Believe in the possible and crucial impact of computing simulations in the
       new product development (> 80%);
   • Expect positive marketing (> 50%) and financial effects (2/3 in future vs 1/3
       in the current period) from computing simulations;
   • Allocate > 5% of revenues for R&D and innovations (45%);
   • Are ready to rent HW and SW solutions (7 out of 10 companies);
   • Have concerns about the current lack of internal HPC expertise (5 out of 10
       companies).
(2) There is a high potential to integrate cloud computing services because the
    majority of companies:
   • Have reasonable requirements for data confidentiality treatment (40% are at a
       restrictive level of use);
                                                        1069
                                                        Page 20 of 28




Fig. 12  Cloud HPC potential of Montenegrin companies
                                                        S. Nikolic et al.
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                 Page 21 of 28   1069


    • Transfer moderate amounts of data to a remote Cloud location (Sufficient
       internet connection in the range of 10–100 Mbps);
    • Assume a normal level of real-time interaction during remote data process-
       ing (58% with "response time" up to 10 min acceptable);
    • Have full trust (37%) and perceive risk as acceptable (57%) regarding data
       protection provided by HPC providers.
(3) Nevertheless, there is no critical need for HPC computational power because:
    • Seven out of 10 companies perform simulations on a low computing level
    • Every 2nd company expects a normal simulation time (up to 8 h), which is
       not HPC critical;
    • Almost 2/3 of companies never or rarely perform computer simulations;
    • Three-fifths of companies use < 100 core hours of simulations, which is not
       HPC critical.
   By applying the same methodological approach and comparative analyses on
the IT cluster (36% of the market sample structure), better positioning is wit-
nessed on the Y-axis, indicating HPC performance on the LOW value, as shown
in Fig. 12, and trends towards the high usage of cloud-based capacities (Fig. 12).
   Through the surveying process and by analysing self-evaluation reports of
participating companies, 20,75% of Montenegrin companies (and 20.51% of all
SME) are positioned in the top right quadrant (“Magic quadrant-Ready”), as
demonstrated by the evaluation graph (Fig. 12). Those Montenegrin companies
are identified as HPC-ready users, which already:

•   Use at least 16–128 cores when performing simulations;
•   Require time-critical simulations (< 1 h);
•   Require > 10 design reiterations during simulation;
•   Perform computer simulations on a daily and weekly basis;
•   Measure computer simulations at a level of ≥ 10,000 core hours or more.

   IT companies have been recognised within Montenegro’s policy and market
environment as key drivers of digital transformation and innovation. Empiri-
cal evidence of this market research (72% of companies positioned in “Magic
quadrant-Ready”—high Cloud and high HPC potential are SME/IT companies)
suggests their greater potential and need for critical mass to drive broader HPC
adoption. These companies should engage in value co-creation relationships [16]
with universities, research and competence centres, funding organisations or pub-
lic institutions. Productive collaboration or strategic partnerships would enhance
HPC competencies through educational and training programmes, funding initia-
tives or innovation programmes and facilitate cost-effective or subsidised access
to knowledge-intensive, high-end HPC technologies. The market research sup-
ported EuroCC NCC Montenegro in designing tailored HPC-related training
courses and identifying SME/IT companies with intensive computational needs
and high innovation potential, facilitating their access to European supercomput-
ers and services.
1069   Page 22 of 28                                                      S. Nikolic et al.


   In the context of international comparison, the results of the HPC4SME assess-
ment study were analysed compared to the Borštnar and Ilijaš study [8]. This study
examined a small European sample comprising 61 organisations (mostly from Slo-
venia, Bulgaria and Serbia, followed by Spain, Greece, Germany, the UK, Croatia,
Poland, Italy, Austria, France, Norway, North Macedonia, Israel and Ireland), out
of which 64% were SMEs. The study assesses the overall potential for cloud HPC
adoption, revealing that nearly 40% fell into the “Magic quadrant—Ready” category.
By contrast, by applying the same HPC4SME evaluation framework in the Monte-
negrin market sample, involving 53 organisations (of which 74% were SMEs), only
21% of companies (and 21% of SMEs) are assessed “Magic quadrant-Ready”.
   On the other hand, both studies indicated that organisations demonstrated “High
potential” in two criteria: (1) Readiness—willingness to adopt HPC business oppor-
tunities and (2) Cloud—significant capacity for accessing cloud environment.
However, the third criterion, HPC—actual computational needs and technical per-
formance—highlights discrepancies in the level of technical maturity. In the Mon-
tenegrin sample, only 21% of SMEs have high HPC potential, versus 45% of all
SMEs in the international study. These findings suggest that Montenegrin compa-
nies face challenges in leveraging HPC technologies compared to EU SMEs from
more advanced economies or mature markets. The lower proportion of SMEs with
high HPC potential indicates structural limitations within the Montenegrin market,
which merit further investigation.
   As a developing country, Montenegro will need targeted interventions to build
capacity, invest in digital skills, improve access to HPC resources, support cross-
border knowledge transfer and strengthen collaboration between industry, aca-
demia and policymakers. Due to the relatively small sample sizes in both studies,
these comparative results should be interpreted as indicative, more than conclusive
and should be further investigated and empirically validated through large-scale
research, supporting a broader international context.


4 Conclusion

This paper presents market research data and industry insights related to HPC readi-
ness and potential in Montenegro, driven by the premise that HPC is becoming a
mainstream technology for industry digitalisation. The research study deploys the
HPC4SME assessment tool supported by quantitative statistical methods and quali-
tative analyses, including company consultations and expert discussions.
   Montenegrin companies demonstrate a high level of organisational readiness in
using HPC simulations, as evidenced by positive considerations related to industry
adoption potential, new product development, business viability, evolving demand
for HPC expertise and high readiness to engage in HW and SW outsourcing. While
there is strong potential and confidence in integrating cost-effective cloud services,
the need for HPC critical performance remains limited but emerging, particularly
within the IT sector. Only 21% of SMEs were classified as “Magic Quadrant—
Ready” to adopt cloud-based HPC solutions, in contrast with nearly 40% in the
broader European sample of the comparative study by Borštnar and Ilijaš [8]. This
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                             Page 23 of 28   1069


difference indicates the digital readiness gap between Montenegro and more mature
European markets and supports the study’s contribution in identifying challenges
and measures for policy intervention in developing economies, such as investing in
digital skills, access to HPC resources, supporting cross-border knowledge transfer
and strengthening collaboration between industry, academia and policymakers. Our
findings are consistent with broader TOE and DOI theories, suggesting that factors
such as perceived benefits, organisational readiness and technical capabilities play
a crucial role in the adoption of advanced technologies like HPC. Additionally, the
results support the RBV theory, which suggests that a lack of a skilled workforce
and limited technical performance may impede HPC adoption, as evidenced by the
Montenegrin sample.
   The research provides an in-depth analysis of the market sample in Montene-
gro and evidence-based recommendations to encourage SME adoption of HPC
solutions. It offers valuable insights and practical guidance in examining industry
engagement and development of the HPC ecosystem concerning small economies
or specific contexts. Industry stakeholders may leverage the assessment methodol-
ogy to identify companies ready to acquire HPC services. Additionally, findings
from less mature or developed markets can be valuable for targeted studies, regional
comparisons or policy recommendations for bridging the gap to more advanced
economies.
   This study makes significant contributions to the field of HPC adoption among
SMEs. Further research may explore sector-specific dynamic or industry-wide vari-
ations in HPC adoption. The study highlights the early-stage development of the
HPC ecosystem in Montenegro, emphasising the need for further investigation into
structural barriers that may be hindering HPC adoption. Given the findings related
to the low levels and high expectations for acquiring technical skills, further studies
should explore in-demand training programmes and academia-industry collabora-
tion through tailored knowledge and technology transfer initiatives.
   While this paper provides valuable insights and recommendations, several limi-
tations should be acknowledged. First, the relatively small market sample (N = 53)
constrains the generalisability of the findings. Second, the study relies on the com-
panies’ self-estimation, which may introduce response bias due to subjective percep-
tions. Future studies should incorporate a larger scale and a more diverse participant
base to enhance the validity of results.
   This study represents the first of its kind in Montenegro, with future HPC4SME
surveys aimed at providing cross-country comparisons of HPC market opportuni-
ties, technical maturity and industry/SME readiness. Industry stakeholders and pol-
icymakers can leverage research-based evidence and gain a more nuanced under-
standing of the factors that influence HPC adoption, enabling them to support
HPC-driven digital acceleration, industry competitiveness and economic growth.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank ARC​TUR​’s team for the access and support for the utilisa-
tion of the HPC4SME Automated Assessment Tool for the companies’ evaluation and as a market intel-
ligence tool for the pilot market study among Montenegrin companies.

Funding This work was partly supported by the EuroCC project, grant agreement 951732 EuroCC-
H2020-JTI-EuroHPC-2019-2 (Horizon Europe), EuroCC2 project, grant agreement No. 101101903
1069     Page 24 of 28                                                                       S. Nikolic et al.


(Digital Europe) and EuroCC4SEE project grant agreement No. 101191697. The JU receives support
from the Digital Europe Programme and Germany, Bulgaria, Austria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland, Portugal, Roma-
nia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, France, Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Slovakia, Norway, Türkiye,
Republic of North Macedonia, Iceland, Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Data availability A dataset containing anonymised responses from Montenegrin companies is available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDeriv-
atives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed mate-
rial. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or
parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view
a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.




References
 1. Skinner C (2018) Digital human: the fourth revolution of humanity includes everyone. ISBN:
    978-1-119-51190-8, April 2018, Wiley
 2. Jelovac D, Ljubojević Č, Ljubojević L (2022) HPC in business: the impact of corporate digital
    responsibility on building digital trust and responsible corporate digital governance. Digit Policy
    Reg Govern 24(6):485–497. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​DPRG-​11-​2020-​0164
 3. Filipović L, Krstajić B, Popović T (2021) Combined adaptive load balancing algorithm for paral-
    lel applications. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Electrical, Electronic and
    Computing Engineering (IcETRAN 2021) (pp. 480–484). ETRAN Society
 4. Cepoi V (2021) Reshaping the Danube Region imaginary: a focus on digital transformation and
    HPC. Res Soc Change 11(2):58–78. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2478/​rsc-​2019-​0009
 5. Joseph E, Riddle M, Sorensen T, Conway S (2022) The economic and societal benefits of Linux
    supercomputers Hyperion Research Retrieved from https://​david​bader.​net/​publi​cation/​2022-​
    hyper​ionre​search/​2022-​Hyper​ionRe​search.​pdf
 6. Rescale (2022) 2022 state of computational engineering report. Retrieved from https://​resca​le.​
    com/​thank-​you-​for-​downl​oading-​2022-​state-​of-​compu​tatio​nal-​engin​eering-​report/
 7. Tadikonda S, Durrant A, Knowlton J, Molina G (2022) Trends driving the future of high-per-
    formance computing (HPC). https://​www.​embed​ded.​com/​trends-​drivi​ng-​the-​future-​of-​high-​perfo​
    rmance-​compu​ting-​hpc/. Accessed 3 February 2025
 8. Borštnar MK, Ilijaš T (2019) Assessment of high-performance computing services potential of
    SMEs. In: 2019 42nd International Convention on Information and Communication Technology,
    Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), Opatija, Croatia, pp 1414–1418, https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    23919/​MIPRO.​2019.​87566​81
 9. Lu Q, Damij N, Whalley J (2022) An exploration of high-performance computing cloud contract
    for SMEs: a systematic literature review. Digit Policy Reg Govern 24(6):525–540. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​1108/​dprg-​11-​2020-​0163
10. Gupta A, Kale LV, Gioachin F, March V, Suen CH, Lee B-S (2013) The who, what, why, and
    how of high-performance computing in the cloud. Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International
    Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, 306–314. IEEE
11. Monteiro A, Teixeira C, Pinto J (2015) HPC in weather forecast: moving to the cloud. Int J
    Cloud Appl Comput 5(1):14–31
12. Al-Salim M, Jabeen F, Gohar M, Sher F (2025) The impact of big data on SME performance: a
    systematic review. Proceedings 4:38. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​proce​eding​s4040​038
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                         Page 25 of 28     1069


13. Koller B, Struckmann N, Buchholz J, Gienger M (2015) Towards an environment to deliver high
    performance computing to small and medium enterprises. Sustained Simulation Performance
    2015 (pp 45–59). Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​20340-9_4
14. Hassan NS, Abdulrahman LM, Delzy MM, Abdulkarim NM, Omar MA, Sami TMG (2023)
    High-performance cloud computing services and its influences by web technology based on
    information systems. Journal of Biomechanical Science and Engineering, March 2023(Special
    Issue II), 263–303. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17605/​OSF.​IO/​KF9XC
15. Netto MAS, Calheiros RN, Rodrigues ER, Buyya R (2017) HPC cloud for scientific and business
    applications: taxonomy, vision, and research challenges. ACM Comput Surv 51(1):1–29. https://​
    doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31502​24
16. Bhattacharya S, Damij N (2023) Value co-creation in a high-performance computing (HPC) service
    ecosystem: opportunities for European SMEs. Digit Policy Regul Gov 25(6):601–615. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​1108/​dprg-​03-​2023-​0042
17. Suklan J (2019) Gap analysis: HPC supply and demand. In: Roncevic B, Coscodaru R, Fric U (eds)
    Go with the flow: High-performance computing and innovations in the Danube region. Vega Press
    Ltd, pp 47–59
18. Aloini D, Latronico L, Pellegrini L (2022) The impact of digital technologies on business mod-
    els. Insights from the space industry. Meas Bus Excell 26(1):64–80. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
    MBE-​12-​2020-​0161
19. Teng X, Wu Z, Yang F (2022) Research on the relationship between digital transformation and per-
    formance of SMEs. Sustainability 14(10):6012. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su141​06012
20. Ghobakhloo M, Hong TS, Sabouri MS, Zulkifli N (2012) Strategies for successful information tech-
    nology adoption in small and medium-sized enterprises. Information 3(1):36–67
21. Karadag H (2015) The role and challenges of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in emerg-
    ing economies: an analysis from Turkey. Bus Manag Stud. https://​doi.​org/​10.​11114/​bms.​v1i2.​1049
22. Gherghina ȘC, Botezatu MA, Hosszu A, Simionescu LN (2020) Small and medium-sized enter-
    prises (SMEs): the engine of economic growth through investments and innovation. Sustainability
    12(1):347. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su120​10347
23. Joint Research Centre (2024) Annual report on European SMEs 2023/2024: SME performance
    review. Publications Office of the European Union. https://​single-​market-​econo​my.​ec.​europa.​eu/​
    smes/​sme-​strat​egy-​and-​sme-​frien​dly-​busin​ess-​condi​tions/​sme-​perfo​rmance-​review_​en
24. Seppänen S, Ukko J, Saunila M (2025) Understanding determinants of digital transformation and
    digitizing management functions in incumbent SMEs. Digital Bus 5(1):100106. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
    1016/j.​digbus.​2025.​100106
25. Lu Y (2024) Impact of digital technologies on organizational change strategies: a review. Res J Bus
    Econ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​61424/​rjbe.​v2i1.​128
26. Çallı BA, Çallı L (2021) Relationships between digital maturity, organizational agility, and firm per-
    formance: an empirical investigation on SMEs. Bus Manag Stud: An Int J 9(2):608–622. https://​doi.​
    org/​10.​15295/​bmij.​v9i2.​1786
27. Khin S, Ho TCF (2019) Digital technology, digital capability and organizational performance: a
    mediating role of digital innovation. Int J Innov Sci 11(2):177–195. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
    IJIS-​08-​2018-​0083
28. Häikiö J, Koivumäki T (2016) Exploring digital service innovation process through value creation. J
    Innov Manag 4(2):96–122. https://​doi.​org/​10.​24840/​2183-​0606_​004.​002_​0006
29. Javaid M, Haleem A (2024) Digital economy to improve the culture of industry 4.0: a study on fea-
    tures, implementation and challenges. Green Technol Sustain 2(1):100083. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
    grets.​2024.​100083
30. Matt C, Hess T, Benlian A (2015) Digital transformation strategies. Bus Inf Syst Eng 57(5):339–
    343. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12599-​015-​0401-5
31. Cheng H, Ruan P, Wang P (2024) The impact of surging computing power on enterprise digital
    transformation–based on quasi-natural experiments set up by the National Supercomputing Center.
    Financ Res Lett 65:105496. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​frl.​2024.​105496
32. Shephard MS, Smith C, Kolb JE (2012) Bringing HPC to engineering innovation. Comput Sci Eng
    15(1):16–25
33. Ezell SJ, Atkinson RD (2016) The vital importance of high-performance computing to US com-
    petitiveness. Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, available online at: https://​itif.​
    org/​publi​catio​ns/​2016/​04/​28/​vital-​impor ​tance-​high-​perfo​r mance-​compu​ting-​us-​compe​titiv​eness,
    Accessed 12 February 2025
1069      Page 26 of 28                                                                              S. Nikolic et al.


34. Gupta P, Seetharaman A, Raj JR (2013) The usage and adoption of cloud computing by small and
    medium businesses. Int J Inf Manage 33(5):861–874
35. https://​prace-​ri.​eu/. Accessed 10 February 2025
36. https://​www.​ff4eu​rohpc.​eu/. Accessed 10 February 2025
37. https://​www.​eurocc-​access.​eu/. Accessed 10 February 2025
38. Karozis S, Ziouvelou X, Karkaletsis V (2023) Mapping the national HPC ecosystem and train-
    ing needs: the Greek paradigm. J Supercomput 79(10):10691–10716. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
    s11227-​023-​05080-y
39. Kayabay K, Sari O, Demirtas M, Bostan S, Ortakaya B (2022) Development of a maturity assess-
    ment tool to improve SME HPC capabilities. Zenodo. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​zenodo.​73574​36
40. Karaivanova A, Atanassov E, Gurov TV (2022) On the HPC/HPDA/AI competencies in Bulgaria.
    Digit Present Preserv Cult Sci Herit 12:291–298. https://​doi.​org/​10.​55630/​dipp.​2022.​12.​28
41. Atanassov E, Gurov T, Karaivanova A (2023) Towards effective Bulgarian competence centre in
    high performance computing – service portfolio and competences. Digit Present Preserv Cult Sci
    Heritage 13:333–340
42. Atanassov E, Karaivanova A, Gurov TV (2024) HPC ecosystem and competencies in Bulgaria.
    Digit Present Preserv Cult Sci Herit 14:302–310. https://​doi.​org/​10.​55630/​dipp.​2024.​14.​31
43. European Master for High-Performance Computing (2022). EU Master for HPC. Retrieved from
    https://​eumas​ter4h​pc.​uni.​lu/ Accessed 03 February 2025
44. HLRS on behalf of the EuroCC consortium. (2023). EuroCC Success Stories. Stuttgart
45. Koch M, Arlandini C, Antonopoulos G, Baretta A, Beaujean P, Bex GJ, Biancolini ME, Celi S,
    Costa E, Drescher L, Eleftheriadis V, Fadel NA, Fink A, Galbiati F, Hatzakis I, Hompis G, Lewan-
    dowski N, Memmolo A, Mensch C, Obrist D, Paneta V, Papadimitroulas P, Petropoulos K, Porziani
    S, Savvidis G, Sethia K, Strakos P, Svobodova P, Vignali E (2023) HPC+ in the medical field:
    overview and current examples. Technol Health Care 31(4):1509–1523. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​
    THC-​229015
46. Cunningham J, Damij N, Modic D (2022) An exploratory study of high-performance computing
    technology adoption over the stages of entrepreneurship. Int J Entrep Ventur 14(4/5):497–526
47. Botelho Junior S, O’Gorman B (2022) Region-specific guidelines to encourage SMEs to use
    high-performance computing. Digit Policy, Reg Gov 24(6):513–524. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​
    DPRG-​02-​2021-​0032
48. Sterling T, Anderson M, Brodowicz M (2017) High-performance computing: modern systems and
    practices
49. Kara PA, Ognjanovic I, Hölscher D, Šćekić L, Kovacevic P, Mantas J, Šendelj R, Laković L, Mak-
    simovic A, Rakočević N, Roganović M, Reich C, Simon A, Bokor L (2023) Human-centric digitiza-
    tion in Montenegro: progress through 17 years of national independence and future trends. Electron-
    ics 13(13):2460. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​elect​ronic​s1313​2460
50. Regional Cooperation Council, WESTERN BALKANS DIGITAL ECONOMY SOCIETY INDEX
    • WB DESI 2022 Report, available online https://​www.​rcc.​int/​files/​user/​docs/​43a52​1a624​cf085​
    23a22​68a67​a7be2​ff.​pdf, Accessed 12 February 2025
51. Šovran A (2021) ICT Cortex analizirao rezultate poslovanja 30 najuspješnijih IT kompanija u Crnoj
    Gori. Retrieved from https://​digit​alizuj.​me/​2021/​04/​ict-​cortex-​anali​zirao-​rezul​tate-​poslo​vanja-​30-​
    najus​pjesn​ijih-​it-​kompa​nija-u-​crnoj-​gori/
52. Geist A, Reed DA (2015) A survey of high-performance computing scaling challenges. The Int J
    High Perform Comput Appl 31(1):104–113. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​10943​42015​597083
53. Samuel J, Brennan-Tonetta M, Samuel Y, Subedi P, Smith J (2021) Strategies for democratization of
    supercomputing: Availability, accessibility and usability of high-performance computing for educa-
    tion and practice of big data analytics. Retrieved from https://​www.​seman​ticsc​holar.​org/​paper/​Strat​
    egies-​for-​Democ​ratiz​ation-​of-​Super​compu​ting%​3A-​Samuel-​Brenn​an-​Tonet​ta/​20a2b​051f6​95475​
    115b8​fad03​033c3​17e6f​f dd54
54. Chen J, Guan Q, Liang X, Bryant P, Grubel P, McPherson A, Ahrens J (2018) Build and execu-
    tion environment (bee): an encapsulated environment enabling HPC applications to run everywhere.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​bigda​ta.​2018.​86225​72
55. Wei J, Chen M, Wang L et al (2022) Status, challenges and trends of data-intensive supercomputing.
    CCF Trans HPC 4:211–230. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s42514-​022-​00109-9
56. Ejarque J, Badia RM, Albertin L, Aloisio G, Baglione E, Becerra Y, Boschert S, Berlin JR, D’Anca
    A, Elia D, Exertier F, Fiore S, Flich J, Folch A, Gibbons SJ, Koldunov N, Lordan F, Lorito S,
    Løvholt F, Macías J, Volpe M (2022) Enabling dynamic and intelligent workflows for HPC, data
FIT4HPC?—Accelerating digital transformation by…                                     Page 27 of 28   1069


      analytics, and AI convergence. Future Gener Comput Syst 134:414–429. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
      future.​2022.​04.​014
57.   Beck T, Baroni A, Bennink R, Buchs G, Coello Pérez EA, Eisenbach M, Ferreira da Silva R,
      Gopalakrishnan Meena M, Gottiparthi K, Groszkowski P, Humble TS, Landfield R, Maheshwari
      K, Oral S, Sandoval MA, Shehata A, Suh I-S, Zimmer C (2024) Integrating quantum computing
      resources into scientific HPC ecosystems. Futur Gener Comput Syst 161:11–25. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
      1016/j.​future.​2024.​06.​058
58.   Karimabadi H, Wilkes J, Roberts DA (2023) The need for adoption of neural HPC (NeuHPC) in
      space sciences. Front Astron Space Sci 10:1120389. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fspas.​2023.​11203​89
59.   Melo MCR, Bernardi RC (2023) Fostering discoveries in the era of exascale computing: how the
      next generation of supercomputers empowers computational and experimental biophysics alike.
      Biophys J 122(14):2833–2840. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bpj.​2023.​01.​042
60.   Li J, Wang S, Rudinac S et al (2024) High-performance computing in healthcare: an automatic lit-
      erature analysis perspective. J Big Data 11:61. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40537-​024-​00929-2
61.   Elmisaoui S, Kissami I, Ghidaglia J-M (2024) High-performance computing to accelerate large-
      scale computational fluid dynamics simulations: a comprehensive study. In International Conference
      on Advanced Intelligent Systems for Sustainable Development (AI2SD’2023) (pp 1–10). Springer.
      https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​031-​54318-0_​31
62.   Kommidi S (2024) The convergence of finance and high-performance computing: Implications for
      modeling accuracy and risk mitigation. Int J Eng Technol Res 9(2):54–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​
      zenodo.​13646​458
63.   Rogers EM (2003) Diffusion of innovations (5th ed). Free Press
64.   Baker J (2011) The technology–organization–environment framework. Integrated Series in Informa-
      tion Systems, 231–245. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-1-​4419-​6108-2_​12
65.   Ahmed I (2020) Technology organization environment framework in cloud computing. TELKOM-
      NIKA Telecommun Comput Electron Control 18(2):716. https://​doi.​org/​10.​12928/​telko​mnika.​
      v18i2.​13871
66.   Koller B, Struckmann N, Buchholz J, Gienger M (2015) ‘Towards an environment to deliver high
      performance computing to small and medium enterprises’, Sustained Simulation Performance, pp
      41–50
67.   Chen Y, Li J, Zhang J (2024) Digitalisation, data-driven dynamic capabilities and responsible inno-
      vation: an empirical study of SMEs in China. Asia Pac J Manage 41(3):1211–1251. https://​doi.​org/​
      10.​1007/​s10490-​022-​09845-6
68.   Porter ME (1998) Clusters and the new economics of competition (Vol 76, No 6, pp 77–90). Boston:
      Harvard Business Review
69.   Alshamaila Y, Papagiannidis S, Li F (2013) Cloud computing adoption by SMEs in the northeast of
      England: a multi-perspective framework. J Enterp Inf Manag 26(3):250–275
70.   Seethamraju R (2015) Adoption of software as a service (SaaS) enterprise resource planning (ERP)
      systems in small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs). Inf Syst Front 17(3):475–492
71.   Ortiz de Guinea A, Raymond L (2020) Enabling innovation in the face of uncertainty through IT
      ambidexterity: a fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis of industrial service SMEs. Int J Inf
      Manage 50:244–260
72.   Barney J (1991) Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J Manage 17(1):99–120
73.   Strategy for Development of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 2018–2022, Montenegrin Min-
      istry of Economic Development, https://​wapi.​gov.​me/​downl​oad/​98c5b​4b3-​8bae-​4017-​972a-​d3a38​
      1dee4​d4?​versi​on=1.0
74.   Smart Specialisation Strategy 2019–2024, Montenegrin Ministry of Science, https://​wapi.​gov.​me/​
      downl​oad/​ea1d6​61e-​922a-​4d42-​af8d-​ae55b​c5398​8e?​versi​on=1.0
75.   Digital Transformation Strategy of Montenegro 2022–2026, Montenegrin Ministry of Public
      Administration, Digital Society and Media, https://​wapi.​gov.​me/​downl​oad/​59dca​b9b-​b0e8-​48b7-​
      830b-​6e4ea​b6905​21?​versi​on=1.0
76.   https://​sesam​enet.​eu/, Accessed on 09 February 2025
77.   https://​cordis.​europa.​eu/​proje​ct/​id/​609100, Accessed 09 February 2025
78.   https://​i4ms.​eu/, Accessed 09 February 2025
79.   https://​www.​forti​ssimo-​proje​ct.​eu/, Accessed 09 February 2025
80.   https://​www.​hpc4s​me.​eu/, Accessed 09 February 2025
1069      Page 28 of 28                                                                           S. Nikolic et al.


81. Borštnar MK, Ilijaš T, Pucihar A (2015) Assessment of cloud high-performance computing poten-
    tial for SMEs. In Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Operations Research in Slo-
    venia (pp 417–422)
82. Alić I, Siering M, Bohanec M (2013) Hot stock or not? A qualitative multi-attribute model to detect
    financial market manipulation. Challenges and Impacts for Individuals, Organizations and Society,
    Bled, Slovenia, In eInnovations
83. Howell DC (2011) Chi-square test: Analysis of contingency tables. In Lovric M (Ed). International
    Encyclopedia of Statistical Science (pp 252–254). Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​
    04898-2_​174
84. MONSTAT (2022) Innovation activities of enterprises 2018 - 2020. Retrieved from https://​www.​
    monst​at.​org/​uploa​ds/​files/​inova​cije/​Innov​ation%​20act​iviti​es%​20of%​20ene​trpri​ses_​Relea​se.​pdf
85. IBM (2022) What is high-performance computing (HPC)? Retrieved from https://​www.​ibm.​com/​
    topics/​hpc
86. Vanderweide D (2015) OpEx vs. CapEx: The real cloud computing cost advantage. Retrieved from
    https://​www.​10thm​agnit​ude.​com/​opex-​vs-​capex-​the-​real-​cloud-​compu​ting-​cost-​advan​tage/
87. Rodrigues A (2016) Optical networks for high-performance computing: Promises and perils. In
    2016 IEEE Optical Interconnects Conference (OI) (pp 1–1). IEEE. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​OIC.​
    2016.​74830​04
88. Lynn T, Fox G, Gourinovitch A, Rosati P (2020) Understanding the determinants and future chal-
    lenges of cloud computing adoption for high-performance computing. Future Internet 12(8):135.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​fi120​80135

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
