International Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing
Volume 10 • Issue 4 • October-December 2020




Determinants of Cloud
Business Intelligence Adoption
Among Ghanaian SMEs
Acheampong Owusu, Business School, University of Ghana, Ghana
     https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7789-5162




ABSTRACT

This study explores the determinants of Cloud BI adoption among Ghanaian small-medium enterprises
(SMEs). The study was guided by the technology-organization-environment (TOE) framework and
information systems adoption model and employed the qualitative method through an in-depth
interview with data collected from CEOs/key managers from 17 SMEs in Ghana. The results showed
that technological characteristics (relative advantage, complexity, and compatibility), organizational
characteristics (organization size and organizational readiness), environmental characteristics
(competitive pressure and regulatory framework), and owner-manager characteristics (innovativeness
and knowledge) influence the adoption of Cloud BI tools and services in Ghanaian SMEs. This study
contributes to the body of knowledge by providing a Cloud BI adoption model from a developing
country context. Practically, the study provides insights to vendors about the kind of Cloud BI
Ghanaian SMEs require. Vendors can also use the findings to create awareness about the services
they offer in terms of Cloud BI.

Keywords
Cloud BI, Cloud Computing, DOI, Ghana, SMEs, TOE Framework



1. INTRODUCTION

The use of Information Technology (IT) in supporting the operations of businesses is a very long-
established phenomenon. IT is used to support every aspect of organizations (public or private;
small, medium or large) and from diverse sectors (e.g. education, telecommunications, healthcare,
banking and finance, retailing & distribution, manufacturing, services, etc.). However, in most cases,
the cost of IT infrastructure (hardware, software, services, and support) and manpower alone can be
a deterrent to many organizations especially small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in developing
economies, specifically sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Most SME businesses in developing economies and
specifically Ghana, in particular, find it difficult when it comes to ICT investment due to insufficient
finance and manpower (Mujinga & Chipangura, 2011). If you consider the benefits that come with
adopting appropriate ICT tools in any business, this becomes an obstacle that deters such small and
medium businesses. As a result, the SMEs are at disadvantaged positions compared with the more
established larger organizations with all the appropriate technologies and manpower.
     SMEs support the economic growth of emerging economies via service delivery, employment
creation, poverty reduction, entrepreneurship, rural development, and exports of a nation, and are


DOI: 10.4018/IJCAC.2020100104
                                                                      ﻿
 Copyright © 2020, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
                                                                      ﻿


48
                                                   International Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing
                                                                   Volume 10 • Issue 4 • October-December 2020



mostly unearth in the informal sector where they partake in a diversity of sectors from finance,
manufacturing, hospitality, and mining among others (Mujinga & Chipangura, 2011; Yeboah-Boateng
& Essandoh, 2014). As SMEs are the engine of growth in all economies both developed and developing
(Yeboah-Boateng & Essandoh, 2014), the need for them getting the requisite support in terms of
technologies to advance their businesses is highly desirable.
     It is in line with these that one key technology, Cloud Computing has become popular amongst
SMEs due to its perceived benefits in cost-cutting when it comes to IT spending (Ali, Soar, Mcclymont,
Yong, & Biswas, 2015). Through cloud computing, many firms that would have had it difficult to buy
IT equipment, software, telecommunication, and hire competent IT staff have been able to enjoy the
services without spending much (Mujinga & Chipangura, 2011). Cloud computing offers on-demand
computing power with rapid implementation, fewer IT staff, low maintenance, and subsequently lower
cost (Yang & Tate, 2012). These appealing features have caused cloud computing to be a principal
IT press topic in recent years. The worldwide expenditure on Public Cloud services according to a
recent IDC research was expected to reach US$210 billion in 2019 and the industry keeps growing
where “the market is forecast to achieve a five-year compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 22.5%
with public cloud services spending reaching $370 billion in 2022” (IDC, 2019).
     Subashini and Kavitha (2011) emphasized that SMEs have seen the potential values of cloud
computing which is enhancing their businesses through the tapping of cloud infrastructure to advance
fast access to the finest infrastructure and business applications at an insignificant cost. Cloud
computing can bring substantial benefits to SMEs through the reduction of costs of investment in
ICT infrastructure and even manpower. As cloud computing enables end-users to make use of various
services including software, computation, data access, and storage without knowing the physical
location and configuration of the system that delivers the services, it does not necessarily require
the competence of a highly skilled IT staff to implement (Mujinga & Chipangura, 2011). This is
an advantage to most SMEs since the hiring of skilled IT staff and maintenance of IT hardware
infrastructure is not needed.
     Another interesting phenomenon that is trending recently in the cloud computing industry is
Cloud Business Intelligence (BI). As BI Systems are very expensive to implement and demands a
lot of skilled manpower, time-consuming and others, BI vendors such as Birst, ClearStory Data,
Domo, GoodData specializes in offering cloud-based BI and analytics (Gartner, 2016) which is
more affordable and offered as part of Software as a service (SaaS) namely BI as a Service (BI-as-a-
Service) (Olszak, 2014). Others such as Birst, IBM, Microsoft, Platfora, Oracle, SAP, and SAS offer
both on-premises and cloud-based solutions (Gartner, 2016). Gartner (2016) predicted as part of
their strategic planning assumptions that “by 2018, most business users and analysts in organizations
will have access to self-service tools to prepare data for analysis as part of the shift to deploying
modern BI platforms”. Forbes (2018) in their survey of “The State of Cloud Business Intelligence,
2018” found out that “Cloud BI adoption is soaring in 2018, nearly doubling 2016 adoption levels”.
Additionally, their report shows that “over 90% of Sales & Marketing teams say that Cloud BI is
essential for getting their work done in 2018”, “66% of organizations that consider themselves
completely successful with Business Intelligence (BI) initiatives currently use the cloud”, “Financial
Services (62%), Technology (54%), and Education (54%) have the highest Cloud BI adoption rates
in 2018” and finally, “86% of Cloud BI adopters name Amazon AWS as their first choice, 82% name
Microsoft Azure, 66% name Google Cloud, and 36% identify IBM Bluemix as their preferred provider
of cloud BI services” (Forbes, 2018).
     However, a review of extant academic literature about the types of cloud computing adopted
by Ghanaian SMEs in terms of the specific services they are using in the cloud is non-existent. The
studies have been generic in the Ghanaian context in terms of the cloud service delivery models
(SaaS, IaaS, PaaS) and deployment models (public, private, community, and hybrid) and does not
offer the actual state of cloud computing adopted by Ghanaian SMEs (Senyo, Effah, & Addae, 2016;
Yeboah-Boateng & Essandoh 2014; Adam & Musah 2015). In addition, the focus of extant academic


                                                                                                           49
       20 more pages are available in the full version of this
   document, which may be purchased using the "Add to Cart"
                   button on the product's webpage:
   www.igi-global.com/article/determinants-of-cloud-business-
                intelligence-adoption-among-ghanaian-
                        smes/262615?camid=4v1



     This title is available in InfoSci-Journals, InfoSci-Journal
     Disciplines Business, Administration, and Management,
  InfoSci-Journal Disciplines Computer Science, Security, and
        Information Technology, InfoSci-Journal Disciplines
       Engineering, Natural, and Physical Science, InfoSci-
   Computer Science and IT Knowledge Solutions – Journals,
         InfoSci-Business Knowledge Solutions – Journals.
              Recommend this product to your librarian:
                www.igi-global.com/e-resources/library-
                          recommendation/?id=2




Related Content

A Framework on Data Mining on Uncertain Data with Related Research
Issues in Service Industry
Edward Hung (2011). Service Intelligence and Service Science: Evolutionary
Technologies and Challenges (pp. 114-128).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/framework-data-mining-uncertain-
data/47359?camid=4v1a

A Survey on Blood Image Diseases Detection Using Deep Learning
Mohamed Loey, Mukdad Rasheed Naman and Hala Helmy Zayed (2020).
International Journal of Service Science, Management, Engineering, and Technology
(pp. 18-32).
www.igi-global.com/article/a-survey-on-blood-image-diseases-detection-
using-deep-learning/256653?camid=4v1a
Location-Based Services (LBS) in Micro-Scale Navigation: Shortcomings and
Recommendations
Suleiman Almasri, Muhammad Alnabhan, Ziad Hunaiti and Eliamani Sedoyeka
(2009). International Journal of E-Services and Mobile Applications (pp. 51-71).
www.igi-global.com/article/location-based-services-lbs-
micro/37447?camid=4v1a

Comparative Study for Different Provisioning Policies for Load Balancing in
Cloudsim
Layla Albdour (2017). International Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing (pp.
76-86).
www.igi-global.com/article/comparative-study-for-different-provisioning-
policies-for-load-balancing-in-cloudsim/182254?camid=4v1a
